massive black hole bends light to magnify distant galaxy | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingmeteorite from european fireball ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
massive black hole bends light to magnify distant galaxy . 
by clara moskowitz published 27 july 2010 . 
this labeled image of the first-ever foreground quasar ( blue ) lensing a background galaxy ( red ) was taken with the keck ii telescope and its nirc-2 instrument using laser guide star adaptive optics . 
discovering more of these lenses will allow astronomers to determine the masses of quasars ’ host galaxies . 
( image credit : f. courbin/s . 
a giant black hole spouting energy from inside a galaxy isacting like a cosmic magnifying glass , giving astronomers a clear view of an evenmore distant galaxy behind it.it is the first time a quasar ? 
the central region of agalaxy dominated by an energy-spewingblack hole ? 
has been discovered acting as a gravitationallens . 
the cosmic lens phenomenon was first predicted by albert einsteins theoryof general relativity.the discovery gives astronomers a glimpse at two galaxies atonce , allowing researchers to photograph the distant object while weighing andmeasuring the intervening galaxy and the bright powerhouse at its core.the quasar is known as sdss j0013+1523 and located about 1.6billion light-years from earth.warped space-timeaccording to the theory , very large masses warp thespace-time around them , even causing light to bend as it travels through theregion . 
thus , light from farawayobjects sometimes can be magnified by the bent space-time to provide alarger and brighter ? 
though also distorted and curved ? 
view.in this case , scientists are more interested in studying thelens itself than the magnified image.galaxies that host quasars are hard to study because theirlight is often overpowered by the blaring radiation from material falling ontothe supermassiveblack holes in their centers . 
a single quasar can be 1,000 times brighterthan an entire galaxy of 100 billion stars.it is a bit like staring into bright car headlightsand trying to discern the color of their rims , lead researcher fr ? d ? riccourbin of the ecole polytechnique f ? d ? rale de lausanne in switzerland said ina statement . 
by studying the way a quasar magnifies light as a gravitationallens , he said , we now can measure the masses of these quasar hostgalaxies and overcome this difficulty.weighing quasarsthe newfound lens , and similar ones being sought by researchers , could provide an opportunity to learn about the galaxies that shelter quasarsin their centers.by studying the way the quasar magnifies the distant light ? including the shape of its distortion and the number of magnified images thelens produces ? 
scientists can measure how matter is distributed in the lensgalaxy . 
they can even calculate the total matter of the quasar and its hostgalaxy.often quasarsare discovered when their light is being magnified by an intervening galaxyacting as a gravitational lens . 
scientists set out to look for a case of thisreverse lensing of a galaxys light by a quasar by looking through the dataobtained by the sloan digital sky survey ? 
a detailed map of a quarter of thesky.it was through that study that researchers found the quasar sdssj0013+1523 acting as a cosmic lens.we were delighted to see that this idea actuallyworks , said georges meylan , a professor of physics at ecole polytechniquef ? d ? rale de lausanne.this discovery demonstrates the continued utility ofgravitational lensing as an astrophysical tool.the researchers published their findings july 20 in thejournal astronomy & astrophysics.how black holes gobble dark mattertop 10 strangest things in spacevideo : black holes : warping time & space . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
clara moskowitzsocial links navigationassistant managing editorclara moskowitz is a science and space writer who joined the space.com team in 2008 and served as assistant managing editor from 2011 to 2013 . 
clara has a bachelors degree in astronomy and physics from wesleyan university , and a graduate certificate in science writing from the university of california , santa cruz . 
she covers everything from astronomy to human spaceflight and once aced a nastar suborbital spaceflight training program for space missions . 
clara is currently associate editor of scientific american . 
to see her latest project is , follow clara on twitter . 
more from space.1japans new h3 rocket aborts 1st-ever launch attempt2virgin galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202133 mystery objects shot down by us likely werent spy craft , biden says4black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy5pictures from space ! 
our image of the day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
astrophysics : fire in the hole ! 
skip to main content . 
thank you for visiting nature.com . 
you are using a browser version with limited support for css . 
the best experience , we recommend you use a more up to date browser ( or turn off compatibility mode in . 
internet explorer ) . 
in the meantime , to ensure continued support , we are displaying the site without styles . 
view all journals . 
about the journal . 
publish with us . 
sign up for alerts . 
astrophysics : fire in the hole ! . 
published : 03 april 2013. . 
astrophysics : fire in the hole ! . 
volume 496 , pages 20–23 ( 2013 ) cite this article . 
astronomy and astrophysicsparticle physicsphysicsquantum physics . 
a correction to this article was published on 10 april 2013. . 
this article has been updated . 
will an astronaut who falls into a black hole be crushed or burned to a crisp ? . 
you have full access to this article via your institution . 
credit : andy pottsin march 2012 , joseph polchinski began to contemplate suicide — at least in mathematical form . 
a string theorist at the kavli institute for theoretical physics in santa barbara , california , polchinski was pondering what would happen to an astronaut who dived into a black hole . 
obviously , he would die . 
but how ? according to the then-accepted account , he wouldn ’ t feel anything special at first , even when his fall took him through the black hole ’ s event horizon : the invisible boundary beyond which nothing can escape . 
but eventually — after hours , days or even weeks if the black hole was big enough — he would begin to notice that gravity was tugging at his feet more strongly than at his head . 
as his plunge carried him inexorably downwards , the difference in forces would quickly increase and rip him apart , before finally crushing his remnants into the black hole ’ s infinitely dense core.but polchinski ’ s calculations , carried out with two of his students — ahmed almheiri and james sully — and fellow string theorist donald marolf at the university of california , santa barbara ( ucsb ) , were telling a different story1 . 
in their account , quantum effects would turn the event horizon into a seething maelstrom of particles . 
anyone who fell into it would hit a wall of fire and be burned to a crisp in an instant . 
your browser does not support the audio element . 
zeeya merali talks about what would happen if she fell into a black hole . 
the team ’ s verdict , published in july 2012 , shocked the physics community . 
such firewalls would violate a foundational tenet of physics that was first articulated almost a century ago by albert einstein , who used it as the basis of general relativity , his theory of gravity . 
known as the equivalence principle , it states in part that an observer falling in a gravitational field — even the powerful one inside a black hole — will see exactly the same phenomena as an observer floating in empty space . 
without this principle , einstein ’ s framework crumbles.well aware of the implications of their claim , polchinski and his co-authors offered an alternative plot ending in which a firewall does not form . 
but this solution came with a huge price . 
physicists would have to sacrifice the other great pillar of their science : quantum mechanics , the theory governing the interactions between subatomic particles.the result has been a flurry of research papers about firewalls , all struggling to resolve the impasse , none succeeding to everyone ’ s satisfaction . 
steve giddings , a quantum physicist at the ucsb , describes the situation as “ a crisis in the foundations of physics that may need a revolution to resolve ” .with that thought in mind , black-hole experts came together last month at cern , europe ’ s particle-physics laboratory near geneva , switzerland , to grapple with the issue face to face . 
they hoped to reveal the path towards a unified theory of ‘ quantum gravity ’ that brings all the fundamental forces of nature under one umbrella — a prize that has eluded physicists for decades.the firewall idea “ shakes the foundations of what most of us believed about black holes ” , said raphael bousso , a string theorist at the university of california , berkeley , as he opened his talk at the meeting . 
“ it essentially pits quantum mechanics against general relativity , without giving us any clues as to which direction to go next. ” . 
the roots of the firewall crisis go back to 1974 , when physicist stephen hawking at the university of cambridge , uk , showed that quantum effects cause black holes to run a temperature2 . 
left in isolation , the holes will slowly spew out thermal radiation — photons and other particles — and gradually lose mass until they evaporate away entirely ( see ‘ the information paradox ’ ) .these particles aren ’ t the firewall , however ; the subtleties of relativity guarantee that an astronaut falling through the event horizon will not notice this radiation . 
but hawking ’ s result was still startling — not least because the equations of general relativity say that black holes can only swallow mass and grow , not evaporate . 
hawking ’ s argument basically comes down to the observation that in the quantum realm , ‘ empty ’ space isn ’ t empty . 
down at this sub-sub-microscopic level , it is in constant turmoil , with pairs of particles and their corresponding antiparticles continually popping into existence before rapidly recombining and vanishing . 
only in very delicate laboratory experiments does this submicroscopic frenzy have any observable consequences . 
but when a particle–antiparticle pair appears just outside a black hole ’ s event horizon , hawking realized , one member could fall in before the two recombined , leaving the surviving partner to fly outwards as radiation . 
the doomed particle would balance the positive energy of the outgoing particle by carrying negative energy inwards — something allowed by quantum rules . 
that negative energy would then get subtracted from the black hole ’ s mass , causing the hole to shrink.hawking ’ s original analysis has since been refined and extended by many researchers , and his conclusion is now accepted almost universally . 
but with it came the disturbing realization that black-hole radiation leads to a paradox that challenges quantum theory.quantum mechanics says that information can not be destroyed . 
in principle , it should be possible to recover everything there is to know about the objects that fell in a black hole by measuring the quantum state of the radiation coming out . 
but hawking showed that it was not that simple : the radiation coming out is random . 
toss in a kilogram of rock or a kilogram of computer chips and the result will be the same . 
watch the black hole even until it dies , and there would still be no way to tell how it was formed or what fell in it.this problem , dubbed the black-hole information paradox , divided physicists into two camps . 
some , like hawking , argued that the information truly vanishes when the black hole dies . 
if that contradicted quantum laws , then better laws needed to be found . 
others , like john preskill , a quantum physicist at the california institute of technology in pasadena , stuck by quantum mechanics . 
“ for a time , i did seriously try to build an alternative theory that included information loss , ” he says . 
“ but i couldn ’ t find one that made any sense — nobody could. ” the stalemate continued for the next two decades , finding its most famous expression in 1997 , when preskill publicly bet hawking that information was not being lost , with the winner to receive an encyclopaedia of his choice.but that same year , the deadlock was broken by a discovery made by juan maldacena , a physicist then at harvard university in cambridge . 
maldacena ’ s insight built on an earlier proposal that any three-dimensional ( 3d ) region of our universe can be described by information encoded on its two-dimensional ( 2d ) boundary3,4,5 , in much the same way that laser light can encode a 3d scene on a 2d hologram . 
“ we used the word ‘ hologram ’ as a metaphor , ” says leonard susskind , a string theorist at stanford university in california , and one of those who came up with the proposal4 . 
“ but after doing more mathematics , it seemed to make literal sense that the universe is a projection of information on the boundary. ” what maldacena came up with was a concrete mathematical formulation6 of the hologram idea that made use of ideas from superstring theory , which posits that elementary particles are composed of tiny vibrating loops of energy . 
his model envisages a 3d universe containing strings and black holes that are governed only by gravity , bounded by a 2d surface on which elementary particles and fields obey ordinary quantum laws without gravity . 
hypothetical residents of the 3d space would never see this boundary because it is infinitely far away . 
but that wouldn ’ t matter : anything happening in the 3d universe could be described equally well by equations in the 2d universe , and vice versa . 
“ i found that there ’ s a mathematical dictionary that allows you to go back and forth between the languages of these two worlds , ” maldacena explains.this meant that even 3d black-hole evaporation could be described in the 2d world , where there is no gravity , where quantum laws reign supreme and where information can never be lost . 
and if information is preserved there , then it must also be preserved in the 3d world . 
somehow , information must be escaping from the black holes . 
one for all . 
a few years later , marolf showed that every model of quantum gravity will obey the same rules , whether or not it is built from string theory7 . 
“ it was a combination of maldacena and marolf ’ s work that turned me around , ” explains a long-term proponent of information loss , ted jacobson , a quantum physicist at the university of maryland in college park . 
in 2004 , hawking publicly admitted that he had been wrong , and gave preskill a baseball encyclopaedia to make good on their bet.such was the strength of maldacena ’ s discovery that most physicists believed that the paradox had been settled — even though nobody had yet explained how hawking radiation smuggles information out of the black hole . 
“ i guess we just all assumed there would be a straightforward answer , ” says polchinski.there wasn ’ t . 
when polchinski and his team set themselves the task of clearing up that loose end in early 2012 , they soon stumbled on yet another paradox — the one that eventually led them to the fatal firewall.hawking had shown that the quantum state of any one particle escaping from the black hole is random , so the particle can not be carrying any useful information . 
but in the mid-1990s , susskind and others realized that information could be encoded in the quantum state of the radiation as a whole if the particles could somehow have their states ‘ entangled ’ — intertwined in such a way that measurements carried out on one will immediately influence its partner , no matter how far apart they are.but how could that be , wondered the polchinski ’ s team ? 
for a particle to be emitted at all , it has to be entangled with the twin that is sacrificed to the black hole . 
and if susskind and others were right , it also had to be entangled with all the hawking radiation emitted before it . 
yet a rigorous result of quantum mechanics dubbed ‘ the monogamy of entanglement ’ says that one quantum system can not be fully entangled with two independent systems at once.to escape this paradox , polchinski and his co-workers realized , one of the entanglement relationships had to be severed . 
reluctant to abandon the one required to encode information in the hawking radiation , they decided to snip the link binding an escaping hawking particle to its infalling twin . 
but there was a cost . 
“ it ’ s a violent process , like breaking the bonds of a molecule , and it releases energy , ” says polchinski . 
the energy generated by severing lots of twins would be enormous . 
“ the event horizon would literally be a ring of fire that burns anyone falling through , ” he says . 
and that , in turn , violates the equivalence principle and its assertion that free-fall should feel the same as floating in empty space — impossible when the former ends in incineration . 
so they posted a paper on the preprint server , arxiv , presenting physicists with a stark choice : either accept that firewalls exist and that general relativity breaks down , or accept that information is lost in black holes and quantum mechanics is wrong1 . 
“ for us , firewalls seem like the least crazy option , given that choice , ” says marolf.the paper rocked the physics community . 
“ it was outrageous to claim that giving up einstein ’ s equivalence principle is the best option , ” says jacobson . 
bousso agrees , adding : “ a firewall simply can ’ t appear in empty space , any more than a brick wall can suddenly appear in an empty field and smack you in the face. ” if einstein ’ s theory doesn ’ t apply at the event horizon , cosmologists would have to question whether it fully applies anywhere.polchinski admits that he thought they could have made a silly mistake . 
so he turned to susskind , one of the fathers of holography , to find it . 
“ my first reaction was that they were wrong , ” says susskind . 
he posted a paper stating as much8 , before quickly retracting it , after further thought . 
“ my second reaction was that they were right , my third was that they were wrong again , my fourth was that they were right , ” he laughs . 
“ it ’ s earned me the nickname , ‘ the yo-yo , ’ but my reaction is pretty much the same as most physicists ’ . ” since then , more than 40 papers have been posted on the topic in arxiv , but as yet , nobody has found a flaw in the team ’ s logic . 
“ it ’ s a really beautiful argument proving that there ’ s something inconsistent in our thinking about black holes , ” says don page , a collaborator of hawking ’ s during the 1970s who is now at the university of alberta in edmonton , canada . 
a number of inventive solutions have been offered , however . 
one of the most promising resolutions , according to susskind , has come from daniel harlow , a quantum physicist at princeton university in new jersey , and patrick hayden , a computer scientist at mcgill university in montreal , canada . 
they considered whether an astronaut could ever detect the paradox with a real-world measurement . 
to do so , he or she would first have to decode a significant portion of the outgoing hawking radiation , then dive into the black hole to examine the infalling particles . 
the pair ’ s calculations show that the radiation is so tough to decode that the black hole would evaporate before the astronaut was ready to jump in9 . 
“ there ’ s no fundamental law preventing someone from measuring the paradox , ” says harlow . 
“ but in practice , it ’ s impossible. ” giddings , however , argues that the firewall paradox requires a radical solution . 
he has calculated that if the entanglement between the outgoing hawking radiation and its infalling twin is not broken until the escaping particle has travelled a short distance away from the event horizon , then the energy released would be much less ferocious , and no firewall would be generated10 . 
this protects the equivalence principle , but requires some quantum laws to be modified . 
at the cern meeting , participants were tantalized by the possibility that giddings ’ model could be tested : it predicts that when two black holes merge , they may produce distinctive ripples in space-time that can be detected by gravitational-wave observatories on earth . 
there is another option that would save the equivalence principle , but it is so controversial that few dare to champion it : maybe hawking was right all those years ago and information is lost in black holes . 
ironically , it is preskill , the man who bet against hawking ’ s claim , who raised this alternative , at a workshop on firewalls at stanford at the end of last year . 
“ it ’ s surprising that people are not seriously thinking about this possibility because it doesn ’ t seem any crazier than firewalls , ” he says — although he adds that his instinct is still that information survives.the reluctance to revisit hawking ’ s old argument is a sign of the immense respect that physicists have for maldacena ’ s dictionary relating gravity to quantum theory , which seemingly proved that information can not be lost . 
“ this is the deepest ever insight into gravity because it links it to quantum fields , ” says polchinski , who compares maldacena ’ s result — which has now accumulated close to 9,000 citations — to the nineteenth-century discovery that a single theory connects light , electricity and magnetism . 
“ if the firewall argument had been made in the early 1990s , i think it would have been a powerful argument for information loss , ” says bousso . 
“ but now nobody wants to entertain the possibility that maldacena is wrong. ” maldacena is flattered that most physicists would back him in a straight-out fight against einstein , although he believes it won ’ t come to that . 
“ to completely understand the firewall paradox , we may need to flesh out that dictionary , ” he says , “ but we won ’ t need to throw it out. ” the only consensus so far is that this problem will not go away any time soon . 
during his talk , polchinski fielded all proposed strategies for mitigating the firewall , carefully highlighting what he sees as their weaknesses . 
“ i ’ m sorry that no one has gotten rid of the firewall , ” he concludes . 
“ but please keep trying. ” . 
change history05 april 2013this story originally gave the wrong affiliation for ted jacobson — he is at the university of maryland in college park not in baltimore . 
the text has now been corrected.referencesalmheiri , a. , marolf , d. , polchinski , j . 
& sully , j. preprint at http : //arxiv.org/abs/1207.3123 ( 2012 ) .hawking , s. w. nature 248 , 30–31 ( 1974 ) .article . 
bekenstein , j. d. phys . 
d 7 , 2333–2346 ( 1973 ) .article . 
susskind , l. j . 
36 , 6377 ( 1995 ) .article . 
stephens , c. r. , ’ t hooft , g. & whiting , b. f. class . 
11 , 621–647 ( 1994 ) .article . 
maldacena , j. m. adv . 
2 , 231–252 ( 1998 ) .article . 
marolf , d. phys . 
d 79 , 044010 ( 2009 ) .article . 
susskind , l. preprint at http : //arxiv.org/abs/1207.4090 ( 2012 ) .harlow , d. & hayden , p. preprint at http : //arxiv.org/abs/1301.4504 ( 2013 ) .giddings , s. b. preprint at http : //arxiv.org/abs/arxiv:1302.2613 ( 2013 ) .download referencesauthor informationauthors and affiliationszeeya merali is a freelance writer based in london. , . 
zeeya meraliauthorszeeya meraliview author publicationsyou can also search for this author in . 
pubmed google scholaradditional informationsee editorial page 5related linksrelated linksrelated links in nature research . 
against the law 2013-apr-03 . 
astrophysics : going supernova 2013-feb-06 . 
astrophysics : two black holes found in a star cluster 2012-oct-03 . 
collaborative physics : string theory finds a bench mate 2011-oct-19 . 
can information get back out of black holes ? 
hawking changes his mind about black holes 2004-jul-15 . 
blogpost : nustar spies black holes in galactic web . 
blogpost : record-breaking black holes fill a cosmic gap . 
related external links . 
rights and permissionsreprints and permissionsabout this articlecite this articlemerali , z. astrophysics : fire in the hole ! . 
nature 496 , 20–23 ( 2013 ) . 
https : //doi.org/10.1038/496020adownload citationpublished : 03 april 2013issue date : 04 april 2013doi : https : //doi.org/10.1038/496020ashare this articleanyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content : get shareable linksorry , a shareable link is not currently available for this article.copy to clipboard . 
provided by the springer nature sharedit content-sharing initiative . 
this article is cited by . 
curved traversable wormholes in ( 3+1 ) -dimensional spacetime . 
vee-liem sawlock yue chew . 
general relativity and gravitation ( 2014 ) . 
you have full access to this article via your institution . 
general relativity at 100. . 
books & culture . 
follow us on facebook . 
follow us on twitter . 
sign up for alerts . 
about the journal . 
about the editors . 
our publishing models . 
editorial values statement . 
history of nature . 
send a news tip . 
publish with us . 
language editing services . 
search articles by subject , keyword or author . 
show results from . 
explore articles by subject . 
find a job . 
guide to authors . 
nature ( nature ) . 
issn 1476-4687 ( online ) . 
issn 0028-0836 ( print ) . 
about nature portfolio . 
articles by subject . 
nature portfolio policies . 
author & researcher services . 
reprints & permissions . 
nature research academies . 
libraries & institutions . 
librarian service & tools . 
recommend to library . 
advertising & partnerships . 
partnerships & services . 
nature middle east . 
manage cookies/do not sell my data . 
terms & conditions . 
california privacy statement . 
© 2023 springer nature limited . 
sign up for the nature briefing newsletter — what matters in science , free to your inbox daily . 
i agree my information will be processed in accordance with the nature and springer nature limited privacy policy . 
get the most important science stories of the day , free in your inbox . 
sign up for nature briefing . 
this is the first photo of the milky ways monster black hole sagittarius a * | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
this is the first photo of the milky ways monster black hole sagittarius a * . 
by keith cooper last updated 12 may 2022 . 
say hello to sagittarius a * . 
the event horizon telescope has captured a historic first image of the supermassive black hole at the center of our galaxy.the image , which was taken in the light of submillimeter radio waves , confirms that there is a black hole in the heart of the milky way that is feeding on a trickle of hydrogen gas.until now , we didnt have the direct picture to prove that this gentle giant in the center of our galaxy is a black hole , feryal özel , an astrophysicist at the university of arizona , said during a national science foundation news conference held thursday ( may 12 ) . 
it shows a bright ring surrounding the darkness , and the telltale sign of the shadow of the black hole.related : heres how scientists turned the world into a telescope ( to see a black hole ) an image of the supermassive black hole at the center of the milky way , a behemoth dubbed sagittarius a * , revealed by the event horizon telescope on may 12 , 2022 . 
( image credit : event horizon telescope collaboration ) this is an astounding achievement , ryan hickox , an astrophysicist at dartmouth college who is not a member of the eht team , told space.com . 
i think i speak for a large number of my astronomy colleagues when i say how remarkably grateful we are.in 2019 , the event horizon telescope ( eht ) made headlines when it succeeded in producing the first ever image of the event horizon of a black hole , specifically the black hole at the center of the active elliptical galaxy messier 87 . 
at the same time as it gathered the data that became that image , the eht also performed observations of sagittarius a * , which is the name given to the milky ways supermassive black hole . 
however , producing an image of sagittarius a * proved more difficult than for m87.for one thing , earths water-laden atmosphere can absorb the submillimeter radio waves that the eht relies on . 
moreover , gas and dust in the intervening 27,000 light-years between us and sagittarius a * can scatter the submillimeter waves and blur the image . 
lastly , whereas m87s black hole has a voracious appetite and appears bright because it is consuming a lot of gas , the flow of material onto sagittarius a * is far more feeble , meaning it is much fainter.getting to this image wasnt an easy journey , özel said . 
it took several years to refine the image and confirm what he had.black holes are the densest objects in the universe , and their gravity is irresistible , to the extent that within a certain distance of a black hole , not even light can escape . 
scientists call this point of no return the event horizon.the eht is able to see light , in the form of radio waves , from hot gas swirling around the edge of the event horizon . 
the black hole feeds from the material within its immediate environment , whether gas clouds , asteroids or even stars that might wander too close and be ripped apart by gravitational tides . 
however , sagittarius a * is being starved.we only see a trickle of material making it all the way to the black hole , harvard astrophysicist michael johnson said during the nsf press conference . 
in human terms , it would be like eating just one grain of rice every million years.why the accretion of gas onto sagittarius a * is so slow has been a puzzle for many years , nobel prize laureate andrea ghez , an astrophysicist at the university of california , los angeles , told space.com . 
theres a lot of mysteries associated with the accretion flow , in terms of why it is so faint , she added . 
a collage shows the first image of the black hole at the center of the milky way at its location on the sky . 
( image credit : eso/josé francisco salgado ( josefrancisco.org ) , eht collaboration ) ghez shared the 2020 nobel prize in physics for measuring the mass of sagittarius a * by observing the motions of stars orbiting close to it . 
ghez and her team calculated a mass that was 4.3 million times the mass of our sun . 
since the size of the event horizon is connected to the mass of the black hole , it was therefore possible to make a prediction , ghez said . 
the power of imaging the black holes ring is that , if you know the mass and distance to the black hole — in other words , the size of the event horizon — then you can use that to compare to theory.the new image shows that the size of sagittarius a * s event horizon is 51.8 microarcseconds on the sky.our image is in very close agreement with theoretical predictions , said özel , who described it as the biggest test of einsteins theory of general relativity ever made , noting that the theory passed with flying colors.its a great laboratory for trying to understand how gravity works in the vicinity of a supermassive black hole , ghez said.a comparison of event horizon telescope views of the black holes at the center of the galaxy m87 , on the left , and of the one in the milky way , at right . 
( image credit : eht collaboration ) more uncertain are our explanations for the turbulence seen in the gas ring . 
the black hole of m87 is much larger than sagittarius a * , and therefore it takes days for changes to become apparent , whereas sagittarius a * is much smaller and , as material whips around it , the brightness of the ring can change in mere minutes.it is teeming with activity , always gurgling with turbulent energy , johnson said of the ring around the event horizon.to try to explain what they were seeing , the eht team — which is made up of more than 300 researchers across 80 institutions — performed more than 5 million supercomputer simulations to try and find one that was a match for what they observed . 
we were left with only a handful of simulations that share the features that we observe , but none of them explain all the features , johnson said . 
in particular , the simulations all predicted more and faster variability than what was actually seen , and could relate to how gas is accreting onto the ring , or how magnetic fields are interacting with that inflow.reacting to the image , hickox said that its just remarkable to see an image of the black hole that we know best , and to see the ring and measure the shadow size as accurately as they did.furthermore , this image of sagittarius a * can now act as a template for other quiescent black holes in the universe.this black hole is more typical of the overall set of black holes in the universe than the one in m87 , hickox said . 
“ if you were just to take a picture of a random supermassive black hole in a galaxy somewhere in the universe , then this is what it would look like.this image of sagittarius a * , and of the black hole in m87 before it , has been made possible through the magic of a technique known as very long baseline interferometry , which allows astronomers to combine data from radio telescopes all across the world as though they were one large telescope , effectively making the eht the largest telescope on earth . 
at the time when the observations were made , the network consisted of eight telescopes ( including one , the south polar telescope , that was too far south to study m87 ) , although three more have since been added to the network . 
the eight-telescope configuration means that the ehts maximum baseline — which is equivalent to a telescopes aperture — for observing sagittarius a * was 6,650 miles ( 10,700 kilometers ) across.future observations will now focus on getting sharper images to better understand the physics of turbulence in the ring around the black hole , as well as how the black hole affects the environment of the galaxy around it.this is driving us to make even better measurements and sharper images , johnson said.sagittarius a * and the black hole in m87 were the ehts top two targets because of their relatively large angular size on the sky . 
supermassive black holes in other galaxies appear far smaller on the sky , beyond even the abilities of the eht to image their event horizon . 
to be able to do so would require a lengthening of the baseline — that is , to widen the ehts aperture — between the two widest points in the ehts network . 
in this sense , the resolution that the eht can achieve is limited by the size of earth , but hickox says there are possibilities beyond earth.ive heard talk about potentially having a space-based addition to the eht , which would significantly increase the overall angular resolution , he told space.com . 
that would be an exciting step forward.editors note : this story was updated at 10:45 a.m. and 1:20 p.m . 
et to include additional information about the finding . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
keith coopersocial links navigationcontributing writerkeith cooper is a freelance science journalist and editor in the united kingdom , and has a degree in physics and astrophysics from the university of manchester . 
hes the author of the contact paradox : challenging our assumptions in the search for extraterrestrial intelligence ( bloomsbury sigma , 2020 ) and has written articles on astronomy , space , physics and astrobiology for a multitude of magazines and websites . 
more from space.1physicists mimic gravity inside the sun using sound waves2hubble space telescope spies odd pair of galaxies near big dipper ( photo ) 3james webb space telescope opens pandoras cluster in stunning image with help from einstein ( video ) 4supercharged valentines day auroras give alaska-based polar lights chaser the night of his life ( photos ) 5comet c/2022 a2 ( pan-starrs ) passes close by the sun this weekend . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
black holes may have existed since the beginning of time ( and could explain dark matter mystery ) | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingmeteorite from european fireball ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
black holes may have existed since the beginning of time ( and could explain dark matter mystery ) . 
by tereza pultarova published 17 december 2021 . 
primordial black holes could explain more than one astronomical mystery . 
a visualization of two black holes merging . 
( image credit : credit : caltech/r . 
hurt ( ipac ) ) . 
the nature and origin of black holes and their role in the evolution of the universe still puzzles scientists . 
now , a new study suggests that the existence of black holes from the earliest moments of the universe could explain more than one astronomical mystery . 
the new study suggests that small primordial black holes filled the early universe right after the big bang , acting as an accelerator of star and galaxy formation . 
this theory by itself is not new , as it was proposed by stephen hawking in 1971 . 
in the new study , however , a team of astronomers shows how the existence of such primordial black holes neatly fills some major gaps in the current understanding of the universe . 
first , these black holes could explain the existence and nature of dark matter , the invisible stuff that , according to estimates , makes up some 85 % of all matter in the universe . 
how do they do that ? 
simply , these black holes could themselves be that never before observed dark matter , the evidence for which has so far failed to materialize , despite the fact that the universe as we understand it can not exist without it.related : astronomers peer deeper into milky ways heart than ever before in new imagesour study shows that without introducing new particles or new physics , we can solve mysteries of modern cosmology from the nature of dark matter itself to the origin of supermassive black holes , nico cappelluti , assistant professor in physics at the university of miami and co-author of the new study , said in a statement.the theory of primordial black holes , originally proposed by hawking , was later abandoned for the current dominant view of black holes being born after massive stars collapse at the end of their lives . 
but observations and detections of black holes enabled in the past years with sophisticated technology show that the black holes lurking around in the universe dont always match expectations . 
some black holes seem too big , others too small , for what would be possible if they had all formed just from collapsing massive stars . 
black holes of different sizes are still a mystery , günther hasinger , science director at the european space agency ( esa ) and also a co-author of the paper , said in the statement . 
we dont understand how supermassive black holes could have grown so huge in the relatively short time available since the universe existed.according to the theory , black holes existed from the beginning of time , accelerating star formation in the early millions of years after the big bang . 
( image credit : esa ) the new model proposed by the scientists , changes a few points on the assumed timeline of the universes evolution . 
for example , if primordial black holes existed from the beginning of time , they would start merging faster , allowing themselves plenty of time to grow into the sizes that can be detected today . 
the gravity of these black holes would also speed up the formation of first stars and galaxies as it would lead to a faster collapse of the dust and gas clouds that filled the dark universe in the first millions of years after the big bang . 
as a result , those mysterious dark ages would be shorter , and the first stars would form much earlier.primordial black holes , if they do exist , could well be the seeds from which all black holes form , including the one at the center of the milky way , priyamvada natarajan , a professor of astronomy at yale university and a co-author of the study , said in the statement . 
and its not just the big black holes , which are hard to explain . 
esas gaia mission , which creates the most detailed three-dimensional map of our galaxy , the milky way , has produced evidence of a large number of smaller black holes scattered all over the galaxy that are too small to be born from the death of giant stars . 
related content : — where do black holes lead ? — scientists revisit the 1st black hole they ever discovered and realize its bigger than they thought— first image of a black hole gets a polarizing update that sheds light on magnetic fields scientists might soon find out whether their theory is correct . 
the james webb space telescope , the biggest and most complex astronomical observatory ever built , is just being readied for launch . 
liftoff is currently targeted for no earlier than dec. 24.the most important goal of this mission is to detect the first light in the universe , that of those first stars that formed after the big bang . 
and when exactly that happened will show which theory is more correct : that black holes existed since the beginning of time or that they only started forming after the first generation of stars died out.if the first stars and galaxies already formed in the so-called dark ages , webb should be able to see evidence of them , hasinger said.the new study has been accepted for publication in the astrophysical journal and is available online on the preprint site arxiv . 
follow tereza pultarova on twitter @ terezapultarova . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
tereza pultarovasocial links navigationsenior writertereza is a london-based science and technology journalist , aspiring fiction writer and amateur gymnast . 
originally from prague , the czech republic , she spent the first seven years of her career working as a reporter , script-writer and presenter for various tv programmes of the czech public service television . 
she later took a career break to pursue further education and added a masters in science from the international space university , france , to her bachelors in journalism and masters in cultural anthropology from pragues charles university . 
she worked as a reporter at the engineering and technology magazine , freelanced for a range of publications including live science , space.com , professional engineering , via satellite and space news and served as a maternity cover science editor at the european space agency . 
more from space.1virgin galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202123 mystery objects shot down by us likely werent spy craft , biden says3black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy4pictures from space ! 
our image of the day5nasas heartbeat-detecting tech to help with turkey earthquake relief effort . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
what happens at the center of a black hole ? 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view deal . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
what happens at the center of a black hole ? . 
by paul sutter last updated 9 february 2022 . 
all of the possibilities are very weird . 
artists illustration of a black hole . 
( image credit : shutterstock ) . 
jump to : . 
lets go for a spin . 
paul m. sutter is an astrophysicist at suny stony brook and the flatiron institute , host of ask a spaceman and space radio , and author of how to die in space . 
sutter contributed this article to space.coms expert voices : op-ed & insights.the singularity at the center of a black hole is the ultimate no mans land : a place where matter is compressed down to an infinitely tiny point , and all conceptions of time and space completely break down . 
and it doesnt really exist . 
something has to replace the singularity , but were not exactly sure what . 
lets explore some possibilities.related : black holes of the universe ( images ) planck starsit could be that deep inside a black hole , matter doesnt get squished down to an infinitely tiny point . 
instead , there could be a smallest possible configuration of matter , the tiniest possible pocket of volume.this is called a planck star , and its a theoretical possibility envisioned by loop quantum gravity , which is itself a highly hypothetical proposal for creating a quantum version of gravity . 
in the world of loop quantum gravity , space and time are quantized — the universe around us is composed of tiny discrete chunks , but at such an incredibly tiny scale that our movements appear smooth and continuous.this theoretical chunkiness of space-time provides two benefits . 
one , it takes the dream of quantum mechanics to its ultimate conclusion , explaining gravity in a natural way . 
and two , it makes it impossible for singularities to form inside black holes.as matter squishes down under the immense gravitational weight of a collapsing star , it meets resistance . 
the discreteness of space-time prevents matter from reaching anything smaller than the planck length ( around 1.68 times 10^-35 meters ) . 
all the material that has ever fallen into the black hole gets compressed into a ball not much bigger than this . 
perfectly microscopic , but definitely not infinitely tiny.this resistance to continued compression eventually forces the material to un-collapse ( i.e. , explode ) , making black holes only temporary objects . 
but because of the extreme time dilation effects around black holes , from our perspective in the outside universe it takes billions , even trillions , of years before they go boom . 
so were all set for now.related : what is gravity ? gravastarsanother attempt to eradicate the singularity — one that doesnt rely on untested theories of quantum gravity — is known as the gravastar . 
its such a theoretical concept that my spell checker didnt even recognize the word . 
the difference between a black hole and a gravastar is that , instead of a singularity , the gravastar is filled with dark energy . 
dark energy is a substance that permeates space-time , causing it to expand outward . 
it sounds like sci-fi , but its real : dark energy is currently in operation in the larger cosmos , causing our entire universe to accelerate in its expansion.as matter falls onto a gravastar , it isnt able to actually penetrate the event horizon ( due to all that dark energy on the inside ) and therefore just hangs out on the surface . 
but outside that surface , gravastars look and act like normal black holes . 
( a black holes event horizon is its point of no return — the boundary beyond which nothing , not even light , can escape . 
) however , recent observations of merging black holes with gravitational wave detectors have potentially ruled out the existence of gravastars , because merging gravastars will give a different signal than merging black holes , and outfits like ligo ( the laser interferometer gravitational-wave observatory ) and virgo are getting more and more examples by the day . 
while gravastars arent exactly a no-go in our universe , they are definitely on thin ice.the universe : big bang to now in 10 easy stepsrelated stories : — what are black holes ? 
facts , theories and definition . 
— einsteins theory of general relativity . 
— the hunt for wormholes : how scientists look for space-time tunnelslets go for a spinplanck stars and gravastars may have awesome names , but the reality of their existence is in doubt . 
so maybe theres a more mundane explanation for singularities , one thats based on a more nuanced — and realistic — view of black holes in our universe.the idea of a single point of infinite density comes from our conception of stationary , non-rotating , uncharged , rather boring black holes . 
real black holes are much more interesting characters , especially when they spin.the spin of a rotating black hole stretches the singularity into a ring . 
and according to the math of einsteins theory of general relativity ( which is the only math weve got ) , once you pass through the ring singularity , you enter a wormhole and pop out through a white hole ( the polar opposite of a black hole , where nothing can enter and matter rushes out at the speed of light ) into an entirely new and exciting patch of the universe.one challenge : the interiors of rotating black holes are catastrophically unstable . 
and this is according to the very same math that leads to the prediction of the traveling-to-a-new-universe stuff.the problem with rotating black holes is that , well , they rotate . 
the singularity , stretched into a ring , is rotating at such a fantastic pace that it has incredible centrifugal force . 
and in general relativity , strong enough centrifugal forces act like antigravity : they push , not pull.this creates a boundary inside the black hole , called the inner horizon . 
outside this region , radiation is falling inward toward the singularity , compelled by the extreme gravitational pull . 
but radiation is pushed by the antigravity near the ring singularity , and the turning point is the inner horizon . 
if you were to encounter the inner horizon , you would face a wall of infinitely energetic radiation — the entire past history of the universe , blasted into your face in less than a blink of an eye.the formation of an inner horizon sows the seeds for the destruction of the black hole . 
but rotating black holes certainly exist in our universe , so that tells us that our math is wrong and something funky is going on.whats really happening inside a black hole ? 
we dont know — and the scary part is that we may never know.additional resourcesyou can learn more about black holes at this nasa explainer page . 
this bbc earth piece has good basic information about black holes as well , and it also describes what would happen to you if you fell into one of these light-gobbling monsters . 
and the stanford encyclopedia of philosophy has a good , detailed breakdown of black holes and singularities . 
bibliographyrovelli , c. and vidotto , f , 2014 . 
planck stars , international journal of modern physics d , vol . 
23 , no . 
12. https : //doi.org/10.1142/s0218271814420267sakai , n. et al , 2014 . 
gravastar shadows , physical review d , vol . 
90. https : //journals.aps.org/prd/abstract/10.1103/physrevd.90.104013taylor , e. and wheeler , j . 
exploring black holes : introduction to general relativity . 
addison wesley longman , 2000. https : //www.amazon.com/exploring-black-holes-introduction-relativity/dp/020138423x .editors note : this story was first published on oct. 27 , 2020 . 
it was updated and republished on feb. 8 , 2022.learn more by listening to the episode what really happens at the center of a black hole ? 
on the ask a spaceman podcast , available on itunes . 
and on the web at http : //www.askaspaceman.com . 
thanks to andy p. , brittany , jeff j. , robert s. , vladimir b. , jack s. , @ grobillard , and james l. for the questions that led to this piece ! 
ask your own question on twitter using # askaspaceman or by following paul @ paulmattsutter . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
paul suttersocial links navigationspace.com contributorpaul m. sutter is an astrophysicist at suny stony brook and the flatiron institute in new york city . 
paul received his phd in physics from the university of illinois at urbana-champaign in 2011 , and spent three years at the paris institute of astrophysics , followed by a research fellowship in trieste , italy , his research focuses on many diverse topics , from the emptiest regions of the universe to the earliest moments of the big bang to the hunt for the first stars . 
as an agent to the stars , paul has passionately engaged the public in science outreach for several years . 
he is the host of the popular ask a spaceman ! 
podcast , author of your place in the universe and how to die in space and he frequently appears on tv — including on the weather channel , for which he serves as official space specialist . 
more from space.1chelyabinsk meteor explosion was a planetary defense wakeup call2heres how chinas astronauts keep fit aboard tiangong space station ( video ) 3virgin orbit traces failed uk rocket launch to dislodged fuel filter4star trek annual 2023 is a holodeck trip through trek history5big asteroid to zoom by earth on wednesday . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingmeteorite from european fireball ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy . 
by stefanie waldek published 16 february 2023 . 
the origin of dark energy has been perplexing scientists for decades . 
comments ( 6 ) . 
an illustration of a black hole . 
( image credit : mark garlick/science photo library/getty images ) . 
when astronomers discovered that the universe is expanding at an accelerating rate , they theorized that some force must be pushing things farther apart and overcoming gravity , which should be slowing things down . 
that force was suggested to be dark energy , but no one has ever figured out from where it comes.but a team of 17 international researchers led by the university of hawaii has discovered the first evidence for the origin point of dark energy : black holes.black holes acquire mass in two ways : accretion of gas and mergers with other black holes . 
but in studying nine billion years of black hole evolution in dormant giant elliptical galaxies , the researchers discovered that the older black holes are much larger than they should be based on those two methods of growth . 
that means there must be another way these black holes are acquiring mass . 
researchers suggest the answer is dark energy in the form of vacuum energy , a kind of energy included in spacetime itself . 
[ that ] pushes the universe further apart , accelerating the expansion , according to a statement .related : black holes : everything you need to knowif the theory holds , then this is going to revolutionize the whole of cosmology , because at last weve got a solution for the origin of dark energy thats been perplexing cosmologists and theoretical physicists for more than 20 years , dr. chris pearson of stfc ral space , a co-author of a study on the discovery , said in a statement.related stories : — galactic collisions act as a cosmic delivery service for hungry monster black holes — star survives spaghettification by black hole — black holes at galactic centers blast out 10 times more light than previously thoughtthe idea that black holes are a source of dark energy isnt new . 
in fact , its part of einsteins theory of general relativity . 
but this is the first time astronomers have obtained observational evidence to support the theory.were really saying two things at once : that theres evidence the typical black hole solutions dont work for you on a long , long timescale , and we have the first proposed astrophysical source for dark energy , said study author duncan farrah , university of hawaii astronomer , in the statement.a paper on the teams research was published in the astrophysical journal letters . 
on wednesday ( feb 15 ) .follow stefanie waldek on twitter @ stefaniewaldek . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom . 
and on facebook . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
stefanie waldeksocial links navigationcontributing writerspace.com contributing writer stefanie waldek is a self-taught space nerd and aviation geek who is passionate about all things spaceflight and astronomy . 
with a background in travel and design journalism , as well as a bachelor of arts degree from new york university , she specializes in the budding space tourism industry and earth-based astrotourism . 
in her free time , you can find her watching rocket launches or looking up at the stars , wondering what is out there . 
learn more about her work at www.stefaniewaldek.com . 
see all comments ( 6 ) . 
comment from the forums . 
the explainer video in the article explained exactly . 
is the space inside , say , a galaxy growing but overcome by the gravitational attraction between the stars ? 
the answer is no . 
space within any gravitationally bound system is unaffected by the surrounding expansion . 
buhz2k9dyhy:356view : https : //youtu.be/buhz2k9dyhy ? t=356 . 
sabine hossenfelder : the solution of general relativity that describes the expanding universe is a solution on average ; it is good only on very large distances . 
but the solutions that describe galaxies are different - and just dont expand . 
its not that galaxies expand unnoticeably , they just dont . 
the full solution , then , is both stitched together : expanding space between non-expanding galaxies.it is only somewhere beyond the scales of galaxy clusters that expansion takes over . 
http : //backreaction.blogspot.bg/2017/08/you-dont-expand-just-because-universe.html . 
so cosmologists apply the expansion solutions only to voids deprived of galaxies ; to galaxies and galactic clusters they apply nonexpansion solutions . 
why do cosmologists resort to this trick ? 
because , if they applied expansion solutions to galaxies and galactic clusters , observations would immediately disprove the expansion theory . 
here is why : . 
if expansion is actual inside galaxies and galactic clusters , the competition between expansion and gravitational attraction would distort those cosmic structures - e.g . 
fringes only weakly bound by gravity would succumb to expansion and fly away . 
and the theory , if it takes into account the intragalactic expansion , will have to predict the distortions . 
but no distortions are observed - there is really no expansion inside galaxies and galactic clusters . 
and cosmologists , without much publicity , have simply made the theory consistent with this fact . 
since there is no expansion inside galaxies and galactic clusters , there is no expansion anywhere else . 
the so called cosmological ( hubble ) redshift is due to the speed of light slowing down as photons travel through vacuum , in a non-expanding universe . 
this is not a totally unacceptable idea : . 
some physicists , however , suggest that there might be one other cosmic factor that could influence the speed of light : quantum vacuum fluctuation . 
this theory holds that so-called empty spaces in the universe arent actually empty - theyre teeming with particles that are just constantly changing from existent to non-existent states . 
quantum fluctuations , therefore , could slow down the speed of light . 
https : //www.sciencealert.com/how-much-do-we-really-know-about-the-speed-of-light . 
black holes are the transformers of the universe . 
works like vacuum cleaners . 
it is a ` null ` energy . 
they balance the universal yin/yang energy . 
what goes in generally negative energy and turns back into universe as positive energy . 
if the negative energy is stubborn to be transformed , it can stay in there as in an infinite loop . 
can be called ` lost in space ` but it is a one way ticket . 
because inside is null energy , and vacuums the negative you can not call it dark energy . 
it works for all positive . 
or : we dont understand gravity , and for that reason and others dont know how far away things really are and all of this is just nonsense . 
admin said : black holes may be the origin of dark energy , according to a study by a team of researchers led by the university of hawaii . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy : read morei dont understand how black holes would cause repulsion instead of pulling the universe closer together . 
the new theory that preceded this new observation . 
i would like to bring to your attention my paper on researchgate in 2018 about my idea that dark matter is actually caused by black holes . 
the idea is that black holes consume the vacuum energy , which has the effect of drawing inwards all embedded matter ( stars , planets etc ) in the space surrounding the black holes . 
thus an apparent extra inward acceleration which is constant with distance is produced and can explain galaxy rotation rates . 
it also explains other phenomena such as the apparent lopsided halos of dark matter that seem to exist . 
you can read about why this occurs and other details in my paper here : . 
an explanation for galaxy rotation rates without requiring dark matter . 
https : //www.researchgate.net/publication/326988843_an_explanation_for_galaxy_rotation_rates_without_requiring_dark_matter . 
declan traill bsc ( melb ) . 
view all 6 comments . 
show more comments . 
more from space.1japans new h3 rocket aborts 1st-ever launch attempt2virgin galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202133 mystery objects shot down by us likely werent spy craft , biden says4black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy5pictures from space ! 
our image of the day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
explosion from the early universe illuminates secret black hole | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingmeteorite from european fireball ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
explosion from the early universe illuminates secret black hole . 
by chelsea gohd last updated 2 april 2021 . 
this artistic impression illustrates a new black hole that was discovered through gravitational lensing using light from an ancient cosmic explosion . 
( image credit : carl knox , ozgrav ) light coming from an explosion in the early universe has illuminated a black hole that astronomers think could expand their understanding of how the celestial objects form . 
three billion years ago , a gamma-ray burst ( known as grb 950830 ) exploded out into the universe . 
in 1995 , astronomers observed the event , essentially peering back in time with the batse ( burst and transient source experiment ) high-energy astrophysics experiment on the compton gamma-ray observatory , which was launched in 1991 on the space shuttle atlantis . 
now , astronomers used the light coming from the ancient explosion to detect an intermediate-mass black hole ( imbh ) , which are elusive and challenging to spot . 
the light coming from the gamma-ray burst allowed the team to use a phenomenon called gravitational lensing to find an imbh . 
this finding supports the existence of imbhs , as they are so hard to detect that some scientists question whether or not theyre even real . 
this work also sheds light on how different types of black holes might form and how supermassive black holes ( smbh ) could get so massive . 
related : no escape : dive into a black hole ( infographic ) intermediate-mass black holes are just what they sound like : celestial middleweights . 
the objects are fairly massive : larger than stellar black holes ( sbh ) but not as massive as smbh , perhaps clocking in at between 100 and 100,000 times the mass of our sun . 
however , these midsize black holes are especially challenging to detect because they are smaller and less active than supermassive black holes ; they do not have readily available sources of fuel , nor as strong a gravitational pull to draw stars and other cosmic material which would produce telltale x-ray glows , according to nasa . 
if a black hole is not accreting matter , it is quite difficult to detect , as by name and nature they are black , james paynter , an astrophysicist at the university of melbourne in australia who led this research , told space.com . 
only the effects of their gravity can betray the existence of a quiescent black hole.but , while imbhs might not be easily spotted by luminous x-ray emissions like a supermassive black hole would , scientists in this new study were able to use gravitational lensing to do the trick . 
gravitational lensing is a phenomenon that occurs when an object ( like a black hole ) acts like a lens , distorting the light coming from a faraway light source ( like a cosmic explosion ) . 
this distortion signals astronomers that there must be a massive object in the way . 
to go a step further and determine what type of object is causing this lensing , the team had to determine its mass . 
because the objects mass falls within the range of an imbh , they decided it was the most likely possibility . 
they were also able to weed out contenders like globular clusters for not being dense enough and dark matter haloes for not being compact enough to cause gravitational lensing.by discovering the imbh using this technique , it tells us something about how common they [ imbh ] are , rachel webster , an astronomer at the university of melbourne and co-author of this study , told space.com . 
if they were very , very rare then we would be most unlikely to see even one case of gravitational lensing . 
its all about statistics and probability.this imbh detection could also reveal information about their larger cousins , smbh . 
it is important to discover these objects to fill the observational gap between stellar black holes ( sbh ) and smbh , paynter said . 
currently , we do not know how smbh are able to grow to such huge masses within the age of the universe . 
there is simply not enough stuff for them to accrete , nor enough time.the clue to the smbh puzzle may lie in imbhs , scientists hope . 
if a seed population of imbhs exist , it begins to fill in this gap . 
where the imbhs came from is another matter… they may be formed from the merger/collapse of massive , hydrogen-pure stars in the early universe , or they may be older , primordial black holes formed during the very first phases of the universe , paynter added . 
while this work is a step forward in not only proving the existence of imbh , but in exploring how different types of black holes develop and exist out in the cosmos , there is still much to be explored and learned about this imbh . 
we now dont know if this imbh is wandering the cosmos alone , or if it is bound to a galaxy or cluster of stars . 
so while we are able to estimate the prevalence of these objects in the universe , we cant pinpoint them to a location or specific habitat , paynter said . 
this work was described in a study published today . 
( march 29 ) in the journal nature astronomy.email chelsea gohd at cgohd @ space.com or follow her on twitter @ chelsea_gohd . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
chelsea gohdsocial links navigationsenior writerchelsea “ foxanne ” gohd joined space.com in 2018 and is now a senior writer , writing about everything from climate change to planetary science and human spaceflight in both articles and on-camera in videos . 
with a degree in public health and biological sciences , chelsea has written and worked for institutions including the american museum of natural history , scientific american , discover magazine blog , astronomy magazine and live science . 
when not writing , editing or filming something space-y , chelsea foxanne gohd is writing music and performing as foxanne , even launching a song to space in 2021 with inspiration4 . 
you can follow her on twitter @ chelsea_gohd and @ foxannemusic . 
more from space.1japans new h3 rocket aborts 1st-ever launch attempt2virgin galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202133 mystery objects shot down by us likely werent spy craft , biden says4black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy5pictures from space ! 
our image of the day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
gravitational waves point scientists to elusive missing-link black hole | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
gravitational waves point scientists to elusive missing-link black hole . 
by meghan bartels published 2 september 2020 . 
astrophysicists are super excited about a new gravitational-wave bang . 
comments ( 1 ) . 
a new sound has joined the symphony of the universe as we hear it.since 2015 , astrophysicists have been using gravitational-wave detectors to hear chirp-like signals and decode massive collisions that send subtle ripples across spacetime . 
now , scientists have heard a new kind of sound , a fast , deep bang that could unlock even more cosmic secrets , according to new research from the laser interferometer gravitational-wave observatory ( ligo ) and its european counterpart , virgo.this is another first , gabriela gonzalez , a physicist at louisiana state university and a member of the massive team behind the new research , told space.com . 
we never get tired of firsts.after more than a year studying the strange new signal , dubbed gw190521 , scientists think they know what caused it : the largest black-hole merger seen to date , resulting in a hitherto unseen intermediate-mass black hole.hunting gravitational waves : the ligo laser interferometer project in photosan artists depiction of two colliding black holes . 
( image credit : mark myers , arc centre of excellence for gravitational wave discovery ( ozgrav ) ) a thunderclap across the universewhile scientists took their time on the analysis , the signal stood out right away as something unique . 
zsuzsanna marka vividly remembers may 21 , 2019 , the night detectors picked up the signal . 
marka is one of the few dozen astrophysicists who have connected their phones to the cosmos and receive alerts whenever gravitational-wave detectors hear a possible signal out in the universe.if an event happens at night , i wake up , marka , a co-author on the new research and an astronomer at columbia university , told space.com . 
she receives the alerts so that she can check whether such events are accompanied by a burst of tiny particles called neutrinos . 
but as she worked that night , in the back of her mind she already knew it was a special detection.i could not help but noticing the high mass , marka said . 
she remembers thinking : this is awesome . 
this is huge . 
this is really one of the incredibly high-mass events which we were hoping we would see , but it wasnt clear that , actually , those high-mass black holes exist.black holes come in different sizes : stellar black holes , which are 10 to 25 times the mass of our sun , according to nasa . , and supermassive black holes , millions or more times larger , the behemoths that lurk at the heart of galaxies like the milky way . 
but astronomers have suspected that there might be something in between : intermediate-mass black holes that clock in at something like 100 to 1,000 times the mass of the sun , according to ligo.an artists depiction of the colliding black holes detected on may 21 , 2019 , and their end product . 
( image credit : ligo/caltech/mit/r . 
hurt ( ipac ) ) an intermediate-mass black hole cant form the way most small black holes do , from the explosions of dying stars . 
stars always lose material during this process , but after a star reaches a certain size , no matter how much larger it grows , when it explodes it will result in a black hole with about 65 times the mass of our sun . 
larger exploding stars simply throw away more material , ending up with black holes at that same maximum size , according to ligo.and until now , these theorized objects have been elusive even by the already mysterious standards of black holes . 
while scientists have begun to observe stellar black holes from ligos earlier detections and supermassive black holes from the event horizon telescopes image of the object at the heart of galaxy m87 , the same has not been true for intermediate-mass black holes.this new bang represents the first observational evidence for this class of object , since calculations suggest the signal was created when an intermediate-mass black hole with 85 times the mass of our sun collided with a stellar black hole of 66 times the suns mass.ligo once again surprises us not just with the detection of black holes in sizes that are difficult to explain , but doing it using techniques that were not designed specifically for stellar mergers , pedro marronetti , program director for gravitational physics at the national science foundation , which funds the ligo detectors , said in a statement.this is of tremendous importance since it showcases the instruments ability to detect signals from completely unforeseen astrophysical events , marronetti said . 
ligo shows that it can also observe the unexpected.a diagram shows black-hole and neutron-stars collisions detected to date . 
gw190521 is located at the center top and produced the most massive black hole of all of them . 
( image credit : ligo-virgo/northwestern u./frank elavsky & aaron geller ) a new generation of black holes , or something more exotic ? as usual , when it comes to gravitational waves , scientists have to build their hypotheses around the scant information they can decipher from an observation.in the case of the gravitational wave candidate gw190521 , the signal was much briefer than ligos previous detections have been , lasting just one tenth of a second . 
it was also a much lower frequency than the signals produced by previous black hole mergers . 
scientists could also trace the signal to a particular swath of sky.from that information , astrophysicists can calculate the distance at which a collision occurs — about 7 billion light-years away , in this case . 
scientists can also calculate the sizes of the two objects that collided , in this case 85 and 66 times the mass of our sun , and of the resulting object , about 142 times the mass of the sun . 
( during a collision , some mass is lost as the energy of gravitational waves . 
) because of the size limit on black holes born from dying stars , the starting masses suggest that at least the larger black hole — and perhaps the smaller as well — could itself be the result of a collision between two black holes.two black holes merge , form a new black hole … then they merge again , marka said . 
this can only happen if you have a very dense environment where you have a lot of black holes.a numerical model showing the black hole collision detected on may 21 , 2019 . 
( image credit : n. fischer , h. pfeiffer , a. buonanno ( max planck institute for gravitational physics ) , simulating extreme spacetimes ( sxs ) collaboration ) she hopes that the collision occurred near an active galactic nucleus , a massive temperamental object at the center of a galaxy that , thanks to its powerful gravity , can anchor other objects nearby , although theres no way for scientists to be sure whether thats the story behind gw190521 , given the data they have about it.moreover , spotting more merging intermediate-mass black holes could solve an ongoing puzzle about their larger cousins , supermassive black holes , the origins of which scientists cant explain.they are the million-solar-mass elephants in the room , christopher berry , an astrophysicist at northwestern university and a ligo researcher , said in a second statement . 
do they grow from stellar-mass black holes , which are born when a star collapses , or are they born via an undiscovered means ? 
long have we searched for an intermediate-mass black hole to bridge the gap between stellar-mass and supermassive black holes . 
now , we have proof that intermediate-mass black holes do exist.despite scientists excitement about the signal and the possibility they saw an intermediate-mass black hole , they cant be positive their current hypothesis is correct . 
although the merger of two black holes fits the data best , astrophysicists are contemplating more exotic explanations as well.what if something entirely new produced these gravitational waves ? 
vicky kalogera , another ligo specialist at northwestern university , said in the same statement . 
its a tantalizing prospect . 
she added that current hypotheses for the signals cause include the collapse of a milky way star or an ancient cosmic string.gravitational waves ripple out from the merger of two black holes . 
( image credit : deborah ferguson , karan jani , deirdre shoemaker , pablo laguna , georgia tech , maya collaboration ) after the firstright now , the ligo and virgo detectors are offline , forced to close at the end of march by the coronavirus pandemic still ravaging the globe . 
but astrophysicists are planning to upgrade the detectors and their algorithms , then get back to listening to the universe.both types of upgrades will be crucial for detecting more signals like gw190521 . 
making the detectors themselves more sensitive will allow scientists to capture ever more distant signals , and fine-tuning the algorithms that process the data will allow scientists to identify briefer signals like this one more easily.and seeing what appears to be the collision of two black holes that were themselves formed by mergers bodes well for the number of signals overall that are out there to observe , gonzalez said.i am hoping it means that there are a lot more black holes — it might be that these are clusters of black holes , that because they are clustered together then they merge more often , she said . 
i am hoping that these clusters are large and they are in lots and lots of places so we can see more black holes.but she and her colleagues will have to see what future observations bring.nature does what it does , we can not tell nature what to do , gonzalez said . 
we take the data and make the discoveries and let theoretical astrophysicists speculate about and invent new theories about what could produce these large black holes.the research is described in two papers . 
published today ( sept. 2 ) in the journals physical review letters and the astrophysical journal letters.email meghan bartels at mbartels @ space.com or follow her on twitter @ meghanbartels . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
meghan bartelssocial links navigationsenior writermeghan is a senior writer at space.com and has more than five years experience as a science journalist based in new york city . 
she joined space.com in july 2018 , with previous writing published in outlets including newsweek and audubon . 
meghan earned an ma in science journalism from new york university and a ba in classics from georgetown university , and in her free time she enjoys reading and visiting museums . 
follow her on twitter at @ meghanbartels . 
see all comments ( 1 ) . 
comment from the forums . 
the report stated from that information , astrophysicists can calculate the distance at which a collision occurs — about 7 billion light-years away , in this case . 
scientists can also calculate the sizes of the two objects that collided , in this case 85 and 66 times the mass of our sun , and of the resulting object , about 142 times the mass of the sun . 
( during a collision , some mass is lost as the energy of gravitational waves . ) . 
the 142 solar mass black hole has a 4.1936e+02 km schwarzschild radius , and diameter 5.6065e-06 au . 
view all 1 comment . 
more from space.1how the superfast flight of astronauts and fighter pilots changes their brains2what is the nancy grace roman space telescope ? 3elegoo neptune 3 plus review : the total package4new satellite photos show surface cracks from devastating turkey earthquake5task complete ! 
perseverance mars rover snaps photo of filled sample depot . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
black holes : everything you need to know | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view deal . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
black holes : everything you need to know . 
by nola taylor tillman , ben biggs , daisy dobrijevic last updated 11 may 2022 . 
these gluttonous beasts are some of the most fascinating objects in space . 
black holes are some of the most fascinating objects in space . 
( image credit : solarseven via getty images ) . 
jump to : . 
black hole discovery . 
how many black holes are there ? . 
black hole images . 
what do black holes look like ? . 
types of black holes . 
black hole facts . 
black holes are some of the strangest and most fascinating objects in space . 
theyre extremely dense , with such strong gravitational attraction that not even light can escape their grasp . 
the milky way could contain over 100 million black holes , though detecting these gluttonous beasts is very difficult . 
at the heart of the milky way lies a supermassive black hole — sagittarius a * . 
the colossal structure is about 4 million times the mass of the sun and lies approximately 26,000 light-years away from earth , according to a statement from nasa .the first image of a black hole was captured in 2019 by the event horizon telescope ( eht ) collaboration . 
the striking photo of the black hole at the center of the m87 galaxy 55 million light-years from earth thrilled scientists around the world . 
related : white holes : what we know about black holes neglected twins black hole discovery albert einstein first predicted the existence of black holes in 1916 , with his general theory of relativity . 
the term black hole was coined many years later in 1967 by american astronomer john wheeler . 
after decades of black holes being known only as theoretical objects . 
the first black hole ever discovered was cygnus x-1 , located within the milky way in the constellation of cygnus , the swan . 
astronomers saw the first signs of the black hole in 1964 when a sounding rocket detected celestial sources of x-rays according to nasa . 
in 1971 , astronomers determined that the x-rays were coming from a bright blue star orbiting a strange dark object . 
it was suggested that the detected x-rays were a result of stellar material being stripped away from the bright star and gobbled up by the dark object — an all-consuming black hole . 
how many black holes are there ? at the center of the milky way lies a supermassive black hole sagittarius a * ( sgr a * ) . 
( image credit : nasa/umass/d.wang et al. , ir : nasa/stsci ) .according to the space telescope science institute . 
( stsci ) approximately one out of every thousand stars is massive enough to become a black hole . 
since the milky way contains over 100 billion stats , our home galaxy must harbor some 100 million black holes . 
though detecting black holes is a difficult task and estimates from nasa . 
suggest there could be as many as 10 million to a billion stellar black holes in the milky way . 
the closest black hole to earth is dubbed the unicorn and is situated approximately 1,500 light-years away . 
the nickname has a double meaning . 
not only does the black hole candidate reside in the constellation monoceros ( the unicorn ) , its incredibly low mass — about three times that of the sun — makes it nearly one of a kind.related : how many black holes are there in the universe ? black hole images the event horizon telescope , a planet-scale array of eight ground-based radio telescopes forged through international collaboration , captured this image of the supermassive black hole in the center of the galaxy m87 and its shadow . 
( image credit : eht collaboration ) .in 2019 the event horizon telescope ( eht ) collaboration released the first image ever recorded of a black hole . 
the eht saw the black hole in the center of galaxy m87 while the telescope was examining the event horizon or the area past which nothing can escape from a black hole . 
the image maps the sudden loss of photons ( particles of light ) . 
it also opens up a whole new area of research in black holes , now that astronomers know what a black hole looks like.in 2021 , astronomers revealed a new view of the giant black hole at the center of m87 , showing what the colossal structure looks like in polarized light . 
as polarized light waves have a different orientation and brightness compared to unpolarized light , the new image shows the black hole in even more detail . 
polarization is a signature of magnetic fields and the image makes it clear that the black holes ring is magnetized . 
following the release of the first image of a black hole in 2019 , astronomers captured a new polarized view of the black hole . 
( image credit : eht collaboration ) .what do black holes look like ? 
black holes have three layers : the outer and inner event horizon , and the singularity.the event horizon of a black hole is the boundary around the mouth of the black hole , past which light can not escape . 
once a particle crosses the event horizon , it can not leave . 
gravity is constant across the event horizon.the inner region of a black hole , where the objects mass lies , is known as its singularity , the single point in space-time where the mass of the black hole is concentrated.scientists cant see black holes the way they can see stars and other objects in space . 
instead , astronomers must rely on detecting the radiation black holes emit as dust and gas are drawn into the dense creatures . 
but supermassive black holes , lying in the center of a galaxy , may become shrouded by the thick dust and gas around them , which can block the telltale emissions.related stories : — what happens at the center of a black hole ? — where do black holes lead to ? — what is the biggest thing in the universe ? 
sometimes , as matter is drawn toward a black hole , it ricochets off the event horizon and is hurled outward , rather than being tugged into the maw . 
bright jets of material traveling at near-relativistic speeds are created . 
although the black hole remains unseen , these powerful jets can be viewed from great distances.the ehts image of a black hole in m87 ( released in 2019 ) was an extraordinary effort , requiring two years of research even after the images were taken . 
thats because the collaboration of telescopes , which stretches across many observatories worldwide , produces an astounding amount of data that is too large to transfer via the internet . 
with time , researchers expect to image other black holes and build up a repository of what the objects look like . 
the next target is likely sagittarius a * , which is the black hole in the center of our own milky way galaxy . 
sagittarius a * is intriguing because it is quieter than expected , which may be due to magnetic fields smothering its activity , a 2019 study reported . 
another study that year showed that a cool gas halo surrounds sagittarius a * , which gives unprecedented insight into what the environment around a black hole looks like.esos black hole anatomy diagram shows what a black hole looks like and labels the different components . 
( image credit : eso ) .types of black holes so far , astronomers have identified three types of black holes : stellar black holes , supermassive black holes and intermediate black holes . 
stellar black holes — small but deadly when a star burns through the last of its fuel , the object may collapse , or fall into itself . 
for smaller stars ( those up to about three times the suns mass ) , the new core will become a neutron star or a white dwarf . 
but when a larger star collapses , it continues to compress and creates a stellar black hole.black holes formed by the collapse of individual stars are relatively small but incredibly dense . 
one of these objects packs more than three times the mass of the sun into the diameter of a city . 
this leads to a crazy amount of gravitational force pulling on objects around the object . 
stellar black holes then consume the dust and gas from their surrounding galaxies , which keeps them growing in size.supermassive black holes — the birth of giants small black holes populate the universe , but their cousins , supermassive black holes , dominate . 
these enormous black holes are millions or even billions of times as massive as the sun but are about the same size in diameter . 
such black holes are thought to lie at the center of pretty much every galaxy , including the milky way.scientists arent certain how such large black holes spawn . 
once these giants have formed , they gather mass from the dust and gas around them , material that is plentiful in the center of galaxies , allowing them to grow to even more enormous sizes.supermassive black holes may be the result of hundreds or thousands of tiny black holes that merge . 
large gas clouds could also be responsible , collapsing together and rapidly accreting mass . 
a third option is the collapse of a stellar cluster , a group of stars all falling together . 
fourth , supermassive black holes could arise from large clusters of dark matter . 
this is a substance that we can observe through its gravitational effect on other objects ; however , we dont know what dark matter is composed of because it does not emit light and can not be directly observed.intermediate black holes scientists once thought that black holes came in only small and large sizes , but research has revealed the possibility that midsize , or intermediate , black holes ( imbhs ) could exist . 
such bodies could form when stars in a cluster collide in a chain reaction . 
several of these imbhs forming in the same region could then eventually fall together in the center of a galaxy and create a supermassive black hole.in 2014 , astronomers found what appeared to be an intermediate-mass black hole in the arm of a spiral galaxy . 
and in 2021 astronomers took advantage of an ancient gamma-ray burst to detect one.astronomers have been looking very hard for these medium-sized black holes , study co-author tim roberts , of the university of durham in the united kingdom , said in a statement . 
there have been hints that they exist , but imbhs have been acting like a long-lost relative that isnt interested in being found.research , from 2018 , suggested that these imbhs may exist in the heart of dwarf galaxies ( or very small galaxies ) . 
observations of 10 such galaxies ( five of which were previously unknown to science before this latest survey ) revealed x-ray activity — common in black holes — suggesting the presence of black holes of from 36,000 to 316,000 solar masses . 
the information came from the sloan digital sky survey , which examines about 1 million galaxies and can detect the kind of light often observed coming from black holes that are picking up nearby debris . 
binary black holes : double trouble artists illustration of a supermassive black hole with a companion black hole orbiting around it . 
( image credit : caltech-ipac ) .in 2015 , astronomers using the laser interferometer gravitational-wave observatory ( ligo ) detected gravitational waves from merging stellar black holes.we have further confirmation of the existence of stellar-mass black holes that are larger than 20 solar masses — these are objects we didnt know existed before ligo detected them , david shoemaker , the spokesperson for the ligo scientific collaboration ( lsc ) , said in a statement . 
ligos observations also provide insights into the direction a black hole spins . 
as two black holes spiral around one another , they can spin in the same direction or the opposite direction.there are two theories on how binary black holes form . 
the first suggests that the two black holes in a binary form at about the same time , from two stars that were born together and died explosively at about the same time . 
the companion stars would have had the same spin orientation as one another , so the two black holes left behind would as well.under the second model , black holes in a stellar cluster sink to the center of the cluster and pair up . 
these companions would have random spin orientations compared to one another according to ligo scientific collaboration . 
ligos observations of companion black holes with different spin orientations provide stronger evidence for this formation theory.were starting to gather real statistics on binary black hole systems , said ligo scientist keita kawabe of caltech , who is based at the ligo hanford observatory . 
thats interesting because some models of black hole binary formation are somewhat favored over the others even now , and in the future , we can further narrow this down.black hole factsif you fell into a black hole , theory has long suggested that gravity would stretch you out like spaghetti , though your death would come before you reached the singularity . 
but a 2012 study published in the journal nature . 
suggested that quantum effects would cause the event horizon to act much like a wall of fire , which would instantly burn you to death.black holes dont suck . 
suction is caused by pulling something into a vacuum , which the massive black hole definitely is not . 
instead , objects fall into them just as they fall toward anything that exerts gravity , like the earth.the first object considered to be a black hole is cygnus x-1 . 
cygnus x-1 was the subject of a 1974 friendly wager between stephen hawking and fellow physicist kip thorne , with hawking betting that the source was not a black hole . 
in 1990 , hawking conceded defeat.miniature black holes may have formed immediately after the big bang . 
rapidly expanding space may have squeezed some regions into tiny , dense black holes less massive than the sun.if a star passes too close to a black hole , the star can be torn apart .astronomers estimate that the milky way has anywhere from 10 million to 1 billion stellar black holes , with masses roughly three times that of the sun.black holes remain terrific fodder for science fiction books and movies . 
check out the movie interstellar , which relied heavily on thorne to incorporate science . 
thornes work with the movies special effects team led to scientists improved understanding of how distant stars might appear when seen near a fast-spinning black hole.additional resourcesdive deeper into the mystery of black holes . 
with nasa science . 
watch videos and read more about black holes . 
from nasas hubblesite . 
discover more about black holes . 
with the national science foundation . 
bibliographyhubblesite : black holes : gravitys relentless pull interactive . 
retrieved may 6 , 2022.nasa . 
imagine the universe ! 
retrieved may 6 , 2022.boen , b . 
( 2013 , august 29 . 
supermassive black hole sagittarius a * . 
retrieved may 6 , 2022.nasas chandra finds intriguing member of black hole family tree . 
chandra x-ray observatory . 
( 2015 , february 25 ) . 
retrieved may 6 , 2022. . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
nola taylor tillmansocial links navigationcontributing writernola taylor tillman is a contributing writer for space.com . 
she loves all things space and astronomy-related , and enjoys the opportunity to learn more . 
she has a bachelor ’ s degree in english and astrophysics from agnes scott college and served as an intern at sky & telescope magazine . 
in her free time , she homeschools her four children . 
follow her on twitter at @ nolatredd . 
more from space.1virgin galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202123 mystery objects shot down by us likely werent spy craft , biden says3black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy4pictures from space ! 
our image of the day5nasas heartbeat-detecting tech to help with turkey earthquake relief effort . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
rare missing link black hole apparently found | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
rare missing link black hole apparently found . 
by mike wall published 27 february 2015 . 
the newly discovered object ngc 2276-3c ( shown in inset ) appears to be an intermediate-mass black hole , astronomers say . 
( image credit : x-ray : nasa/cxc/sao/m.mezcua et al & nasa/cxc/inaf/a.wolter et al ; optical : nasa/stsci and dss ; inset : radio : evn/vlbi ) . 
a newfound cosmic object may be a long-sought missing link that could help flesh out the black hole family tree.the object appears to be an intermediate-mass black hole ( imbh ) , astronomers say . 
called ngc-2276-3c , it lies in an arm of the spiral galaxy ngc-2276 , about 100 million light-years from earth.imbhs are thought to contain the mass of a few hundred to a few hundred thousand suns . 
the black holes are therefore intermediate in size between stellar-mass black holes and the behemoths that lurk at the hearts of galaxies , which can harbor billions of solar masses . 
[ images : black holes of the universe ] researchers have long hypothesized the existence of imbhs , which are believed to be the seeds from which supermassive black holes grow . 
but the midsize structures have proven elusive thus far.astronomers have been looking very hard for these medium-sized black holes , study co-author tim roberts , of the university of durham in the united kingdom , said in a statement . 
there have been hints that they exist , but the imbhs have been acting like a long-lost relative that isnt interested in being found.roberts and his colleagues — led by mar mezcua of the harvard-smithsonian center for astrophysics in cambridge , massachusetts — studied ngc-2276-3c in x-ray light using nasas chandra x-ray observatoryand in radio light using the european very long baseline interferometry network.combining these observations with the known relationship between black hole mass and luminosity in x-ray and radio wavelengths , the team calculated ngc-2276-3cs mass : the equivalanet of about 50,000 suns.we found that ngc 2276-3c has traits similar to both stellar-mass black holes and supermassive black holes , said co-author andrei lobanov , of the max planck institute for radio astronomy in bonn , germany . 
in other words , this object helps tie the whole black hole family together.the researchers also noted that the black hole is firing off a powerful radio jet , which extends about 2,000 light-years out into space . 
young stars are missing along this path for 1,000 light-years or so , suggesting that the jet has cleared out clouds of gas that otherwise would have condensed to form stars , researchers said.a separate study delves into the possible origin of the ngc 2276-3c black hole . 
a team of researchers led by anna wolter , of the national institute for astrophysics in milan , italy , used chandra observations to determine that the equivalent of five to 15 suns are forming every year in the ngc 2276 galaxy . 
this high rate suggests that the galaxy recently collided with a neighboring dwarf galaxy . 
( mergers generally spur star formation . ) 
so ngc 2276-3c may actually have taken shape near the core of a dwarf galaxy , astronomers said.both studies will be published in the journal monthly notices of the royal astronomical society.follow mike wall on twitter @ michaeldwall and google+ . 
follow us @ spacedotcom , facebook or google+ . 
originally published on space.com . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
mike wallsocial links navigationsenior space writermichael wall is a senior space writer with space.com . 
and joined the team in 2010 . 
he primarily covers exoplanets , spaceflight and military space , but has been known to dabble in the space art beat . 
his book about the search for alien life , out there , was published on nov. 13 , 2018 . 
before becoming a science writer , michael worked as a herpetologist and wildlife biologist . 
he has a ph.d. in evolutionary biology from the university of sydney , australia , a bachelors degree from the university of arizona , and a graduate certificate in science writing from the university of california , santa cruz . 
to find out what his latest project is , you can follow michael on twitter . 
more from space.1how the superfast flight of astronauts and fighter pilots changes their brains2what is the nancy grace roman space telescope ? 3elegoo neptune 3 plus review : the total package4new satellite photos show surface cracks from devastating turkey earthquake5task complete ! 
perseverance mars rover snaps photo of filled sample depot . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingmeteorite from european fireball ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy . 
by stefanie waldek published 16 february 2023 . 
the origin of dark energy has been perplexing scientists for decades . 
comments ( 6 ) . 
an illustration of a black hole . 
( image credit : mark garlick/science photo library/getty images ) . 
when astronomers discovered that the universe is expanding at an accelerating rate , they theorized that some force must be pushing things farther apart and overcoming gravity , which should be slowing things down . 
that force was suggested to be dark energy , but no one has ever figured out from where it comes.but a team of 17 international researchers led by the university of hawaii has discovered the first evidence for the origin point of dark energy : black holes.black holes acquire mass in two ways : accretion of gas and mergers with other black holes . 
but in studying nine billion years of black hole evolution in dormant giant elliptical galaxies , the researchers discovered that the older black holes are much larger than they should be based on those two methods of growth . 
that means there must be another way these black holes are acquiring mass . 
researchers suggest the answer is dark energy in the form of vacuum energy , a kind of energy included in spacetime itself . 
[ that ] pushes the universe further apart , accelerating the expansion , according to a statement .related : black holes : everything you need to knowif the theory holds , then this is going to revolutionize the whole of cosmology , because at last weve got a solution for the origin of dark energy thats been perplexing cosmologists and theoretical physicists for more than 20 years , dr. chris pearson of stfc ral space , a co-author of a study on the discovery , said in a statement.related stories : — galactic collisions act as a cosmic delivery service for hungry monster black holes — star survives spaghettification by black hole — black holes at galactic centers blast out 10 times more light than previously thoughtthe idea that black holes are a source of dark energy isnt new . 
in fact , its part of einsteins theory of general relativity . 
but this is the first time astronomers have obtained observational evidence to support the theory.were really saying two things at once : that theres evidence the typical black hole solutions dont work for you on a long , long timescale , and we have the first proposed astrophysical source for dark energy , said study author duncan farrah , university of hawaii astronomer , in the statement.a paper on the teams research was published in the astrophysical journal letters . 
on wednesday ( feb 15 ) .follow stefanie waldek on twitter @ stefaniewaldek . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom . 
and on facebook . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
stefanie waldeksocial links navigationcontributing writerspace.com contributing writer stefanie waldek is a self-taught space nerd and aviation geek who is passionate about all things spaceflight and astronomy . 
with a background in travel and design journalism , as well as a bachelor of arts degree from new york university , she specializes in the budding space tourism industry and earth-based astrotourism . 
in her free time , you can find her watching rocket launches or looking up at the stars , wondering what is out there . 
learn more about her work at www.stefaniewaldek.com . 
see all comments ( 6 ) . 
comment from the forums . 
the explainer video in the article explained exactly . 
is the space inside , say , a galaxy growing but overcome by the gravitational attraction between the stars ? 
the answer is no . 
space within any gravitationally bound system is unaffected by the surrounding expansion . 
buhz2k9dyhy:356view : https : //youtu.be/buhz2k9dyhy ? t=356 . 
sabine hossenfelder : the solution of general relativity that describes the expanding universe is a solution on average ; it is good only on very large distances . 
but the solutions that describe galaxies are different - and just dont expand . 
its not that galaxies expand unnoticeably , they just dont . 
the full solution , then , is both stitched together : expanding space between non-expanding galaxies.it is only somewhere beyond the scales of galaxy clusters that expansion takes over . 
http : //backreaction.blogspot.bg/2017/08/you-dont-expand-just-because-universe.html . 
so cosmologists apply the expansion solutions only to voids deprived of galaxies ; to galaxies and galactic clusters they apply nonexpansion solutions . 
why do cosmologists resort to this trick ? 
because , if they applied expansion solutions to galaxies and galactic clusters , observations would immediately disprove the expansion theory . 
here is why : . 
if expansion is actual inside galaxies and galactic clusters , the competition between expansion and gravitational attraction would distort those cosmic structures - e.g . 
fringes only weakly bound by gravity would succumb to expansion and fly away . 
and the theory , if it takes into account the intragalactic expansion , will have to predict the distortions . 
but no distortions are observed - there is really no expansion inside galaxies and galactic clusters . 
and cosmologists , without much publicity , have simply made the theory consistent with this fact . 
since there is no expansion inside galaxies and galactic clusters , there is no expansion anywhere else . 
the so called cosmological ( hubble ) redshift is due to the speed of light slowing down as photons travel through vacuum , in a non-expanding universe . 
this is not a totally unacceptable idea : . 
some physicists , however , suggest that there might be one other cosmic factor that could influence the speed of light : quantum vacuum fluctuation . 
this theory holds that so-called empty spaces in the universe arent actually empty - theyre teeming with particles that are just constantly changing from existent to non-existent states . 
quantum fluctuations , therefore , could slow down the speed of light . 
https : //www.sciencealert.com/how-much-do-we-really-know-about-the-speed-of-light . 
black holes are the transformers of the universe . 
works like vacuum cleaners . 
it is a ` null ` energy . 
they balance the universal yin/yang energy . 
what goes in generally negative energy and turns back into universe as positive energy . 
if the negative energy is stubborn to be transformed , it can stay in there as in an infinite loop . 
can be called ` lost in space ` but it is a one way ticket . 
because inside is null energy , and vacuums the negative you can not call it dark energy . 
it works for all positive . 
or : we dont understand gravity , and for that reason and others dont know how far away things really are and all of this is just nonsense . 
admin said : black holes may be the origin of dark energy , according to a study by a team of researchers led by the university of hawaii . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy : read morei dont understand how black holes would cause repulsion instead of pulling the universe closer together . 
the new theory that preceded this new observation . 
i would like to bring to your attention my paper on researchgate in 2018 about my idea that dark matter is actually caused by black holes . 
the idea is that black holes consume the vacuum energy , which has the effect of drawing inwards all embedded matter ( stars , planets etc ) in the space surrounding the black holes . 
thus an apparent extra inward acceleration which is constant with distance is produced and can explain galaxy rotation rates . 
it also explains other phenomena such as the apparent lopsided halos of dark matter that seem to exist . 
you can read about why this occurs and other details in my paper here : . 
an explanation for galaxy rotation rates without requiring dark matter . 
https : //www.researchgate.net/publication/326988843_an_explanation_for_galaxy_rotation_rates_without_requiring_dark_matter . 
declan traill bsc ( melb ) . 
view all 6 comments . 
show more comments . 
more from space.1japans new h3 rocket aborts 1st-ever launch attempt2virgin galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202133 mystery objects shot down by us likely werent spy craft , biden says4black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy5pictures from space ! 
our image of the day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingmeteorite from european fireball ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy . 
by stefanie waldek published 16 february 2023 . 
the origin of dark energy has been perplexing scientists for decades . 
comments ( 6 ) . 
an illustration of a black hole . 
( image credit : mark garlick/science photo library/getty images ) . 
when astronomers discovered that the universe is expanding at an accelerating rate , they theorized that some force must be pushing things farther apart and overcoming gravity , which should be slowing things down . 
that force was suggested to be dark energy , but no one has ever figured out from where it comes.but a team of 17 international researchers led by the university of hawaii has discovered the first evidence for the origin point of dark energy : black holes.black holes acquire mass in two ways : accretion of gas and mergers with other black holes . 
but in studying nine billion years of black hole evolution in dormant giant elliptical galaxies , the researchers discovered that the older black holes are much larger than they should be based on those two methods of growth . 
that means there must be another way these black holes are acquiring mass . 
researchers suggest the answer is dark energy in the form of vacuum energy , a kind of energy included in spacetime itself . 
[ that ] pushes the universe further apart , accelerating the expansion , according to a statement .related : black holes : everything you need to knowif the theory holds , then this is going to revolutionize the whole of cosmology , because at last weve got a solution for the origin of dark energy thats been perplexing cosmologists and theoretical physicists for more than 20 years , dr. chris pearson of stfc ral space , a co-author of a study on the discovery , said in a statement.related stories : — galactic collisions act as a cosmic delivery service for hungry monster black holes — star survives spaghettification by black hole — black holes at galactic centers blast out 10 times more light than previously thoughtthe idea that black holes are a source of dark energy isnt new . 
in fact , its part of einsteins theory of general relativity . 
but this is the first time astronomers have obtained observational evidence to support the theory.were really saying two things at once : that theres evidence the typical black hole solutions dont work for you on a long , long timescale , and we have the first proposed astrophysical source for dark energy , said study author duncan farrah , university of hawaii astronomer , in the statement.a paper on the teams research was published in the astrophysical journal letters . 
on wednesday ( feb 15 ) .follow stefanie waldek on twitter @ stefaniewaldek . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom . 
and on facebook . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
stefanie waldeksocial links navigationcontributing writerspace.com contributing writer stefanie waldek is a self-taught space nerd and aviation geek who is passionate about all things spaceflight and astronomy . 
with a background in travel and design journalism , as well as a bachelor of arts degree from new york university , she specializes in the budding space tourism industry and earth-based astrotourism . 
in her free time , you can find her watching rocket launches or looking up at the stars , wondering what is out there . 
learn more about her work at www.stefaniewaldek.com . 
see all comments ( 6 ) . 
comment from the forums . 
the explainer video in the article explained exactly . 
is the space inside , say , a galaxy growing but overcome by the gravitational attraction between the stars ? 
the answer is no . 
space within any gravitationally bound system is unaffected by the surrounding expansion . 
buhz2k9dyhy:356view : https : //youtu.be/buhz2k9dyhy ? t=356 . 
sabine hossenfelder : the solution of general relativity that describes the expanding universe is a solution on average ; it is good only on very large distances . 
but the solutions that describe galaxies are different - and just dont expand . 
its not that galaxies expand unnoticeably , they just dont . 
the full solution , then , is both stitched together : expanding space between non-expanding galaxies.it is only somewhere beyond the scales of galaxy clusters that expansion takes over . 
http : //backreaction.blogspot.bg/2017/08/you-dont-expand-just-because-universe.html . 
so cosmologists apply the expansion solutions only to voids deprived of galaxies ; to galaxies and galactic clusters they apply nonexpansion solutions . 
why do cosmologists resort to this trick ? 
because , if they applied expansion solutions to galaxies and galactic clusters , observations would immediately disprove the expansion theory . 
here is why : . 
if expansion is actual inside galaxies and galactic clusters , the competition between expansion and gravitational attraction would distort those cosmic structures - e.g . 
fringes only weakly bound by gravity would succumb to expansion and fly away . 
and the theory , if it takes into account the intragalactic expansion , will have to predict the distortions . 
but no distortions are observed - there is really no expansion inside galaxies and galactic clusters . 
and cosmologists , without much publicity , have simply made the theory consistent with this fact . 
since there is no expansion inside galaxies and galactic clusters , there is no expansion anywhere else . 
the so called cosmological ( hubble ) redshift is due to the speed of light slowing down as photons travel through vacuum , in a non-expanding universe . 
this is not a totally unacceptable idea : . 
some physicists , however , suggest that there might be one other cosmic factor that could influence the speed of light : quantum vacuum fluctuation . 
this theory holds that so-called empty spaces in the universe arent actually empty - theyre teeming with particles that are just constantly changing from existent to non-existent states . 
quantum fluctuations , therefore , could slow down the speed of light . 
https : //www.sciencealert.com/how-much-do-we-really-know-about-the-speed-of-light . 
black holes are the transformers of the universe . 
works like vacuum cleaners . 
it is a ` null ` energy . 
they balance the universal yin/yang energy . 
what goes in generally negative energy and turns back into universe as positive energy . 
if the negative energy is stubborn to be transformed , it can stay in there as in an infinite loop . 
can be called ` lost in space ` but it is a one way ticket . 
because inside is null energy , and vacuums the negative you can not call it dark energy . 
it works for all positive . 
or : we dont understand gravity , and for that reason and others dont know how far away things really are and all of this is just nonsense . 
admin said : black holes may be the origin of dark energy , according to a study by a team of researchers led by the university of hawaii . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy : read morei dont understand how black holes would cause repulsion instead of pulling the universe closer together . 
the new theory that preceded this new observation . 
i would like to bring to your attention my paper on researchgate in 2018 about my idea that dark matter is actually caused by black holes . 
the idea is that black holes consume the vacuum energy , which has the effect of drawing inwards all embedded matter ( stars , planets etc ) in the space surrounding the black holes . 
thus an apparent extra inward acceleration which is constant with distance is produced and can explain galaxy rotation rates . 
it also explains other phenomena such as the apparent lopsided halos of dark matter that seem to exist . 
you can read about why this occurs and other details in my paper here : . 
an explanation for galaxy rotation rates without requiring dark matter . 
https : //www.researchgate.net/publication/326988843_an_explanation_for_galaxy_rotation_rates_without_requiring_dark_matter . 
declan traill bsc ( melb ) . 
view all 6 comments . 
show more comments . 
more from space.1japans new h3 rocket aborts 1st-ever launch attempt2virgin galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202133 mystery objects shot down by us likely werent spy craft , biden says4black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy5pictures from space ! 
our image of the day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
exploring black holes | nsf - national science foundation . 
skip to main content . 
an official website of the united states government . 
here ’ s how you know . 
heres how you know . 
official websites use .gov . 
a .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the united states . 
secure .gov websites use https . 
( locklocked padlock ) . 
or https : // means you ’ ve safely connected to the .gov website . 
share sensitive information only on official , secure websites . 
funding & awards . 
fund your research . 
search for funding . 
learn about funding . 
policies and procedures . 
proposal and award policies and procedures guide ( pappg ) . 
programs for small businesses . 
search for awards . 
learn about awards . 
public access initiative . 
academic technology transfer and commercialization of university research . 
research directorates & offices . 
computer and information science and engineering . 
international science and engineering . 
mathematical and physical sciences . 
social , behavioral and economic sciences . 
technology , innovation and partnerships . 
news & events . 
in the news . 
science matters blog . 
for the press . 
explore nsf discoveries . 
arctic & antarctic . 
astronomy & space . 
chemistry & materials . 
earth & environment . 
people & society . 
working with nsf . 
contracting with nsf . 
budget , performance and financial reporting . 
remote participant support . 
national science board . 
exploring black holes . 
exploring black holes . 
what is a black hole ? . 
how are black holes studied ? . 
event horizon telescope . 
andrea ghez and the ucla galactic center group . 
green bank observatory . 
south pole telescope . 
images , video , and educational resources . 
credit : nrao/aui/national science foundation ; s. dagnello . 
black holes have long captured the imagination , from groundbreaking ideas in albert einstein ’ s theory of general relativity to the first image of a black hole , revealed a century later by the global event horizon telescope . 
on this site , explore the nature of black holes , read the latest news about black hole research , and download a wide range of educational materials , images and videos of the universe ’ s most extreme objects . 
all sag a * multimedia — including new images , video content and a b-roll package is available for download on the eht page . 
credit : nrao/aui/nsf ; d. berry/skyworks . 
what is a black hole ? . 
black holes are extremely dense pockets of matter , objects of such incredible mass and miniscule volume that they drastically warp the fabric of space-time . 
anything that passes too close , from a wandering star to a photon of light , gets captured . 
most black holes are the condensed remnants of a massive star , the collapsed core that remains following an explosive supernova . 
however , the black hole family tree has several branches , from tiny structures on par with a human cell to enormous giants billions of times more massive than our sun . 
learn more about black holes . 
return to top . 
welcome to the new nsf website . 
were completely revamping our site and we ’ re doing it in the open so you can check on our progress . 
learn more about the project . 
( 703 ) 292-5111 . 
2415 eisenhower avenue , alexandria , virginia 22314. . 
required policy links . 
budget , performance and financial reporting . 
no fear act . 
where do black holes lead to ? 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view deal . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
where do black holes lead to ? . 
by david crookes , daisy dobrijevic published 5 january 2022 . 
if you travel through a black hole , where do you go ? 
where do black holes lead to ? . 
( image credit : all about space magazine ) . 
jump to : . 
are black holes wormholes ? . 
black holes vs. white holes . 
black holes go nowhere . 
do black holes even exist ? . 
so there you are , about to leap into a black hole . 
what could possibly await should — against all odds — you somehow survive ? 
where would you end up and what tantalizing tales would you be able to regale if you managed to clamber your way back ? the simple answer to all of these questions is , as professor richard massey explains , who knows ? 
as a royal society research fellow at the institute for computational cosmology at durham university , massey is fully aware that the mysteries of black holes run deep . 
falling through an event horizon is literally passing beyond the veil — once someone falls past it , nobody could ever send a message back , he said . 
theyd be ripped to pieces by the enormous gravity , so i doubt anyone falling through would get anywhere . 
related : black hole quiz : how well do you know natures weirdest creations ? if that sounds like a disappointing — and painful — answer , then it is to be expected . 
ever since albert einsteins general theory of relativity was considered to have predicted black holes by linking space-time with the action of gravity , it has been known that black holes result from the death of a massive star leaving behind a small , dense remnant core . 
assuming this core has more than roughly three times the mass of the sun , gravity would overwhelm to such a degree that it would fall in on itself into a single point , or singularity , understood to be the black holes infinitely dense core . 
the resulting uninhabitable black hole would have such a powerful gravitational pull that not even light could avoid it . 
so , should you then find yourself at the event horizon — the point at which light and matter can only pass inward , as proposed by the german astronomer karl schwarzschild — there is no escape . 
according to massey , tidal forces would reduce your body into strands of atoms ( or spaghettification , as it is also known ) and the object would eventually end up crushed at the singularity . 
the idea that you could pop out somewhere — perhaps at the other side — seems utterly fantastical.what about wormholes ? 
black holes are strange regions where gravity is strong enough to bend light , warp space and distort time . 
( image credit : karl tate , space.com contributor ) .over the years scientists have looked into the possibility that black holes could be wormholes to other galaxies . 
they may even be , as some have suggested , a path to another universe . 
such an idea has been floating around for some time : einstein teamed up with nathan rosen to theorise bridges that connect two different points in space-time in 1935 . 
but it gained some fresh ground in the 1980s when physicist kip thorne — one of the worlds leading experts on the astrophysical implications of einsteins general theory of relativity — raised a discussion about whether objects could physically travel through them.reading kip thornes popular book about wormholes is what first got me excited about physics as a child , massey said . 
but it doesnt seem likely that wormholes exist.indeed , thorne , who lent his expert advice to the production team for the hollywood movie interstellar , wrote : we see no objects in our universe that could become wormholes as they age , in his book the science of interstellar ( w.w. norton and company , 2014 ) . 
thorne told space.com that journeys through these theoretical tunnels would most likely remain science fiction , and there is certainly no firm evidence that a black hole could allow for such a passage . 
related : the strangest black holes in the universebut , the problem is that we cant get up close to see for ourselves . 
why , we cant even take photographs of anything that takes place inside a black hole — if light can not escape their immense gravity , then nothing can be snapped by a camera . 
as it stands , theory suggests that anything which goes beyond the event horizon is simply added to the black hole and , whats more , because time distorts close to this boundary , this will appear to take place incredibly slowly , so answers wont be quickly forthcoming.i think the standard story is that they lead to the end of time , said douglas finkbeiner , professor of astronomy and physics at harvard university . 
an observer far away will not see their astronaut friend fall into the black hole . 
theyll just get redder and fainter as they approach the event horizon [ as a result of gravitational red shift ] . 
but the friend falls right in , to a place beyond forever . 
whatever that means.artists concept of a wormhole . 
if wormholes exist , they might lead to another universe . 
but , theres no evidence that wormholes are real or that a black hole would act like one . 
( image credit : shutterstock ) .maybe a black hole leads to a white holecertainly , if black holes do lead to another part of a galaxy or another universe , there would need to be something opposite to them on the other side . 
could this be a white hole — a theory put forward by russian cosmologist igor novikov in 1964 ? 
novikov proposed that a black hole links to a white hole that exists in the past . 
unlike a black hole , a white hole will allow light and matter to leave , but light and matter will not be able to enter.scientists have continued to explore the potential connection between black and white holes . 
in their 2014 study published in the journal physical review d . , physicists carlo rovelli and hal m. haggard claimed that there is a classic metric satisfying the einstein equations outside a finite space-time region where matter collapses into a black hole and then emerges from a while hole . 
in other words , all of the material black holes have swallowed could be spewed out , and black holes may become white holes when they die.related stories— stephen hawkings most far-out ideas about black holes— how many black holes are there in the universe ? — balding black holes prove einstein right again on general relativityfar from destroying the information that it absorbs , the collapse of a black hole would be halted . 
it would instead experience a quantum bounce , allowing information to escape . 
should this be the case , it would shed some light on a proposal by former cambridge university cosmologist and theoretical physicist stephen hawking who , in the 1970s , explored the possibility that black holes emit particles and radiation — thermal heat — as a result of quantum fluctuations.hawking said a black hole doesnt last forever , finkbeiner said . 
hawking calculated that the radiation would cause a black hole to lose energy , shrink and disappear , as described in his 1976 paper published . 
in physical review d. given his claims that the radiation emitted would be random and contain no information about what had fallen in , the black hole , upon its explosion , would erase loads of information.this meant hawkings idea was at odds with quantum theory , which says information cant be destroyed . 
physics states information just becomes more difficult to find because , should it become lost , it becomes impossible to know the past or the future . 
hawkings idea led to the black hole information paradox and it has long puzzled scientists . 
some have said hawking was simply wrong , and the man himself even declared he had made an error during a scientific conference in dublin in 2004.so , do we go back to the concept of black holes emitting preserved information and throwing it back out via a white hole ? 
in their 2013 study published in physical review letters . , jorge pullin at louisiana state university and rodolfo gambini at the university of the republic in montevideo , uruguay , applied loop quantum gravity to a black hole and found that gravity increased towards the core but reduced and plonked whatever was entering into another region of the universe . 
the results gave extra credence to the idea of black holes serving as a portal . 
in this study , singularity does not exist , and so it doesnt form an impenetrable barrier that ends up crushing whatever it encounters . 
it also means that information doesnt disappear.maybe black holes go nowhereyet physicists ahmed almheiri , donald marolf , joseph polchinski and james sully still believed hawking could have been on to something . 
they worked on a theory that became known as the amps firewall , or the black hole firewall hypothesis . 
by their calculations , quantum mechanics could feasibly turn the event horizon into a giant wall of fire and anything coming into contact would burn in an instant . 
in that sense , black holes lead nowhere because nothing could ever get inside . 
this , however , violates einsteins general theory of relativity . 
someone crossing the event horizon shouldnt actually feel any great hardship because an object would be in free fall and , based on the equivalence principle , that object — or person — would not feel the extreme effects of gravity . 
it could follow the laws of physics present elsewhere in the universe , but even if it didnt go against einsteins principle it would undermine quantum field theory or suggest information can be lost . 
artists impression of a tidal disruption event which occurs when a star passes too close to a supermassive black hole . 
( image credit : all about space magazine ) black hole of uncertaintystep forward hawking once more . 
in 2014 , he published a study . 
in which he eschewed the existence of an event horizon — meaning there is nothing there to burn — saying gravitational collapse would produce an apparent horizon instead.this horizon would suspend light rays trying to move away from the core of the black hole , and would persist for a period of time . 
in his rethinking , apparent horizons temporarily retain matter and energy before dissolving and releasing them later down the line . 
this explanation best fits with quantum theory — which says information cant be destroyed — and , if it was ever proven , it suggests that anything could escape from a black hole.hawking went as far as saying black holes may not even exist . 
black holes should be redefined as metastable bound states of the gravitational field , he wrote . 
there would be no singularity , and while the apparent field would move inwards due to gravity , it would never reach the center and be consolidated within a dense mass . 
( image credit : karl tate , space.com contributor ) .and yet anything which is emitted will not be in the form of the information swallowed . 
it would be impossible to figure out what went in by looking at what is coming out , which causes problems of its own — not least for , say , a human who found themselves in such an alarming position . 
theyd never feel the same again ! 
one things for sure , this particular mystery is going to swallow up many more scientific hours for a long time to come . 
rovelli and francesca vidotto recently suggested that a component of dark matter could be formed by remnants of evaporated black holes , and hawkings paper on black holes and soft hair was released in 2018 . , and describes how zero-energy particles are left around the point of no return , the event horizon — an idea that suggests information is not lost but captured.this flew in the face of the no-hair theorem which was expressed by physicist john archibald wheeler and worked on the basis that two black holes would be indistinguishable to an observer because none of the special particle physics pseudo-charges would be conserved . 
its an idea that has got scientists talking , but there is some way to go before its seen as the answer for where black holes lead . 
if only we could find a way to leap into one.additional resourcesyou can learn more about black holes with nasa ’ s in depth article . 
and explore how . 
the first image of a black hole was captured . 
if you ’ re looking for some kid-friendly content , esa has some great resources .for teaching little ones all about black holes and the universe . 
bibliographybeyond einstein : from the big bang to black holes . 
wormholes : types & creation . 
( image credit : all about space magazine ) . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
david crookessocial links navigationcontributing writerdavid crookes is a uk-based science and technology journalist who has been writing professionally for more than two decades . 
having studied at the university of durham in england , he has written for dozens of newspapers , magazines and websites including the independent , the i paper , london evening standard , bbc earth , how it works and livescience . 
he has been a regular contributor to space.coms sister publication , all about space magazine since 2014. . 
more from space.1us military shoots down small object over alaska2puffy helium planets could explain exoplanet size mystery3blue origin teams up with shaq to send kids postcards to space on new shepard4watch russian cargo ship arrive at space station early saturday5blue origin aims for mars in 2024 with twin nasa spacecraft . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
how many black holes are there in the universe ? 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
how many black holes are there in the universe ? 
by paul sutter published 16 november 2021 . 
short answer : a lot . 
artists illustration of a supermassive black hole emitting a jet of energetic particles . 
( image credit : nasa/jpl-caltech ) . 
paul m. sutter is an astrophysicist at suny stony brook and the flatiron institute , host of ask a spaceman and space radio , and author of how to die in space . 
sutter contributed this article to space.coms expert voices : op-ed & insights.black holes are notoriously hard to detect , since they are as black as the space surrounding them . 
we can only pinpoint them in special circumstances , like when they pull down gas from a neighboring star or merge together , releasing a flood of gravitational waves.so how many black holes are out there ? 
to answer the question , astronomers have to turn to theoretical calculations to make estimates . 
in a recent study , researchers determined that there are potentially millions of yet-to-be-detected small black holes in our cosmic neighborhood . 
this means that about 1 % of all the matter in the universe is bound up inside black holes.related : black holes of the universe ( images ) black hole ingredientsto make a black hole , you need to make stars , because black holes come from the deaths of stars . 
so to figure out how many black holes are in the universe , the researchers behind the study , which recently appeared in the preprint journal arxiv . 
and has been accepted for publication in the astrophysical journal , had to take a few steps back.the first step is to model galaxy evolution over the billions of years of cosmic history . 
galaxies are the homes of stars , after all , and their overall evolution affects how many of each kind of star appears inside them . 
for example , some galaxies can steadily form new stars year after cosmic year . 
others may suffer merger events that trigger a round of incredibly high star formation , only for them to burn out and produce nothing of note ever again.the astronomers took known observations of galaxy statistics across cosmic time , noting the general trend of galactic merger rates and demographics . 
another key factor is the so-called metallicity of a galaxy , which is a measure of the amount of elements other than hydrogen and helium inside a galaxy ( astronomers call these metals ) . 
bigger galaxies will have more gas , which enables them to form more stars . 
but more metals can enhance the cooling of gas , which in turn helps galaxies to efficiently churn out new stars . 
black hole recipeswith these building blocks , the astronomers had a model of the stellar population within galaxies , telling them how many small stars , medium stars and big stars appear in the universe.and then they needed to trace the evolution — and most importantly , deaths — of those stars . 
to do that , they turned to simulations , which connect the properties of a particular star ( its mass and metallicity ) to its lifetime and eventual demise . 
only a fraction of the very largest stars produce black holes , and those simulations tell the astronomers what percentage of a galaxys stars go lights-out every year.next , the astronomers had to track the evolution of binary systems , as black holes can feed off of sibling stars , becoming engorged on their gas in the process . 
thus a black hole formed in a binary system will end up being larger than a black hole born solo.as the black holes age , they continue to feed on any surrounding gas , which the astronomers also estimated . 
lastly , occasionally black holes find each other in the darkness of interstellar space and merge together . 
so to produce an accurate survey , the astronomers had to estimate the rate of black-hole mergers within each galaxy.related : scientists spot merger of two mismatched black holesrelated stories : —what happens at the center of a black hole ? . 
—black holes : facts , theories and definitions . 
—primordial black holes may flood the universe . 
could one hit earth ? the great black hole censusputting all the pieces together , the astronomers were able to track the population of black holes over the course of billions of years . 
they produced what is called a mass function , which is a sort of astronomical census , reporting how many of each size of black hole exists at any point in time.not surprisingly , the largest black holes , called supermassive black holes , are much rarer than their smaller cousins . 
the researchers found that in every cubic megaparsec of space ( where a megaparsec is one million parsecs , or 3.26 million light-years ) , our universe hosts roughly 50 million solar masses worth of black holes . 
if each black hole is a few times the mass of the sun , that translates to around 10 million individual black holes in that same volume.to put that in perspective , the total amount of mass contained by black holes is about 10 % of the mass contained in stars . 
so for all the stars you see in the night sky , there are a lot of black holes lurking between them.supermassive black holes , on the other hand , are extremely rare , with each galaxy usually hosting only one of those monsters.altogether , black holes account for about 1 % of all the baryonic ( as in , not dark matter ) matter in the cosmos today . 
by far most of the baryonic matter is found in loose nebulae.but still , thats nothing to sneeze at , and it means that black holes are frighteningly common . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom . 
or on facebook . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
paul suttersocial links navigationspace.com contributorpaul m. sutter is an astrophysicist at suny stony brook and the flatiron institute in new york city . 
paul received his phd in physics from the university of illinois at urbana-champaign in 2011 , and spent three years at the paris institute of astrophysics , followed by a research fellowship in trieste , italy , his research focuses on many diverse topics , from the emptiest regions of the universe to the earliest moments of the big bang to the hunt for the first stars . 
as an agent to the stars , paul has passionately engaged the public in science outreach for several years . 
he is the host of the popular ask a spaceman ! 
podcast , author of your place in the universe and how to die in space and he frequently appears on tv — including on the weather channel , for which he serves as official space specialist . 
more from space.1starspots could improve our understanding of habitable zones2south koreas danuri probe captures phases of earth from lunar orbit ( photo ) 3hubble spies strange spokes on saturns rings after 14-year hiatus ( video ) 4europes juice jupiter spacecraft arrives at spaceport ahead of april launch5sun storm may supercharge auroras for valentines day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
the milky ways monster black hole has a cool gas halo — literally | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
the milky ways monster black hole has a cool gas halo — literally . 
by charles q. choi last updated 11 may 2022 . 
this artists impression shows a ring of cool interstellar gas around the supermassive black hole at the center of the milky way , sagittarius a * . 
( image credit : nrao/aui/nsf ; s. dagnello ) . 
for the first time , astronomers may have imaged the cool disk of gas surrounding the gigantic black hole at the heart of the milky way , a new study finds.the research may improve knowledge about how black holes grow and influence their surroundings.at the hearts of most , if not all , galaxies are supermassive black holes millions to billions of times the mass of the sun . 
these enormous structures can have profound effects on the galaxies they call home — for example , they can blast out jets of matter at nearly the speed of light that can travel across an entire galaxy , likely shaping the galaxys evolution.related : the strangest black holes in the universe the location of the black hole at the center of the milky way , sagittarius a . 
( image credit : f. baganoff et al./nasa/cxc/mit ) at the center of our galaxy lies the supermassive black hole sagittarius a * , often abbreviated sgr a * . 
this giant is about 4 million times the mass of the sun and about 14.6 million miles ( 23.6 million kilometers ) in diameter.around sgr a * swirls a ring of debris known as an accretion disk . 
the gas within this disk experiences so much friction that it can reach 18 million degrees fahrenheit ( 10 million degrees celsius ) , according to researchers on the new study . 
previous research has detected x-rays near sgr a * , likely given off from this hot gas.prior research suggests that sgr a * was also surrounded by relatively cool gas , with temperatures ranging from about minus 280 degrees f to 17,500 degrees f ( minus 170 degrees c to 10,000 degrees c ) . 
however , it remains uncertain how much cool gas surrounded sgr a * .if we want to learn about what processes are important and not important for how a black hole gets fed , we need to know the environment around the black hole well , study lead author elena murchikova , an astrophysicist at the institute for advanced study in princeton , new jersey , told space.com . 
but the contribution of cool gas on a black hole has never been studied.now murchikova and her colleagues suggest that they may have imaged the cool accretion disk around sgr a * for the first time . 
this should help improve our understanding of how accretion onto black holes works , she said.scientists used the atacama large millimeter/submillimeter array ( alma ) in chile to analyze the center of the milky way . 
specifically , they focused on wavelengths of light given off by hot ionized hydrogen gas that could make it all the way from the heart of the galaxy to earth , with very little loss of these light signals along the way.an image from alma shows cool hydrogen gas flowing around the milky way centers supermassive black hole , sagittarius a * . 
the red portion of the gas is moving away from earth and the blue portion is moving toward earth . 
the crosshairs show the location of the black hole . 
( image credit : alma ( eso/naoj/nrao ) , e.m. murchikova ; nrao/aui/nsf , s. dagnello ) the researchers detected a disk of cool gas about 20,000 times the diameter of sgr a * , and estimated it was about one-tenth the mass of jupiter , or about 30 times the mass of earth . 
future research should aim for higher-resolution images of the cool gas around black holes , and how this gas interacts with hot gas around black holes , murchikova said . 
we want to find out as much of what is going on around a black hole as possible , she noted.the scientists detailed their findings . 
online june 5 in the journal nature.physicists closer to solving mystery of weird glowing ring around milky ways black holemilky ways monster black hole belches big , but why ? the future of black hole photography : whats next for the event horizon telescopefollow charles q. choi on twitter @ cqchoi . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
charles q. choisocial links navigationcontributing writercharles q. choi is a contributing writer for space.com and live science . 
he covers all things human origins and astronomy as well as physics , animals and general science topics . 
charles has a master of arts degree from the university of missouri-columbia , school of journalism and a bachelor of arts degree from the university of south florida . 
charles has visited every continent on earth , drinking rancid yak butter tea in lhasa , snorkeling with sea lions in the galapagos and even climbing an iceberg in antarctica . 
visit him at http : //www.sciwriter.us . 
more from space.1comet c/2022 a2 ( pan-starrs ) passes close by the sun this weekend2pakistan gets space-flown seeds from chinas shenzhou 14 mission ( video ) 3pictures from space ! 
our image of the day4intuitive machines rings nasdaq bell on path to private moon landing5russia delays launch of replacement soyuz to march . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
slumbering supermassive black hole hides in new hubble image , video | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
slumbering supermassive black hole hides in new hubble image , video . 
by elizabeth howell published 15 march 2016 . 
a hubble space telescope image of elliptical galaxy ngc 4889 , in front of hundreds of background galaxies . 
ngc 4889 hosts a hidden supermassive black hole . 
( image credit : nasa & esa ) . 
an ordinary galaxy hosts an enormous , hidden black hole in a new hubble view.the newfound supermassive black hole embedded in the elliptical galaxy ngc 4889 , as shown in a new video , is one of the biggest ever discovered at 21 billion times the mass of the sun . 
its strong , inescapable gravitational pull has an event horizon 15 times the diameter of neptunes orbit —an incredible 81 billion miles ( 130 billion kilometers ) in diameter.against these numbers , the supermassive black hole at the center of the milky way is a pipsqueak . 
its gravitational influence extends only about as far as one-fifth of mercurys equivalent orbit . 
also , the milky ways black hole mass is just 4 million times that of the sun . 
it can not match this new black holes mighty gulps . 
[ no escape : dive into a black hole ( infographic ) ] but the time when ngc 4889s black hole was swallowing stars and devouring dust is past , the hubble european space agency information centre said in a statement.astronomers believe that the gigantic black hole has stopped feeding , and is currently resting after feasting on ngc 4889 ’ s cosmic cuisine , they added . 
the environment within the galaxy is now so peaceful that stars are forming from its remaining gas and orbiting undisturbed around the black hole.the black hole used to be fueled by galactic material such as gas and dust , which fell inward and created a spinning disk of material known as an accretion disc . 
the black holes strong gravity accelerated the material and heated it to millions of degrees , with the material sending out huge jets.these jets and energy would have made the galaxy system a quasar , one of the brightest celestial objects in the universe . 
at that time , it would have sent out energy up to 1,000 times stronger than what we see from the milky way . 
although the material is now gone , ngc 4889 still is a useful object for astronomers to better understand the evolution of quasars.the huge mass of the black hole was determined using instruments on two ground-based telescopes : the keck ii observatory and the gemini north telescope . 
astronomers measured how fast stars move around ngc 4889 . 
since their velocity depends on the mass of the object they orbit , this revealed the mass of supermassive black hole.editors note : this article was updated to reflect the total mass of the newly-discovered black hole.follow elizabeth howell @ howellspace , or space.com @ spacedotcom . 
were also on facebook and google+ . 
original article on space.com . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
elizabeth howellsocial links navigationstaff writer , spaceflightelizabeth howell ( she/her ) , ph.d. , is a staff writer in the spaceflight channel since 2022 covering diversity , education and gaming as well . 
she was contributing writer for space.com . 
for 10 years before joining full-time , freelancing since 2012 . 
elizabeths reporting includes an exclusive with office of the vice-president of the united states , speaking several times with the international space station , witnessing five human spaceflight launches on two continents , working inside a spacesuit , and participating in a simulated mars mission . 
her latest book , why am i taller ? , is co-written with astronaut dave williams . 
elizabeth holds a ph.d. and m.sc . 
in space studies from the university of north dakota , a bachelor of journalism from canadas carleton university and ( soon ) a bachelor of history from athabasca university . 
elizabeth is also a post-secondary instructor in communications and science since 2015 . 
elizabeth first got interested in space after watching the movie apollo 13 in 1996 , and still wants to be an astronaut someday . 
mastodon : https : //qoto.org/ @ howellspace . 
more from space.1virgin orbit traces failed uk rocket launch to dislodged fuel filter2star trek annual 2023 is a holodeck trip through trek history3big asteroid to zoom by earth on wednesday4starspots could improve our understanding of habitable zones5south koreas danuri probe captures phases of earth from lunar orbit ( photo ) . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
scientists just found the biggest neutron star ( or smallest black hole ) yet in a strange cosmic collision | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
scientists just found the biggest neutron star ( or smallest black hole ) yet in a strange cosmic collision . 
by meghan bartels last updated 23 june 2020 . 
whatever it is , scientists are excited . 
comments ( 1 ) . 
astrophysicists have spotted the strangest gravitational-wave signal yet , an observation that could force scientists to rewrite what they know about the cosmos.gravitational waves form when massive objects distort spacetime surrounding them and send ripples out across the universe . 
scientists caught the first-ever detection of such waves , formed by two colliding black holes , in 2015.since then , gravitational wave detections have only gotten stranger — and scientists have only gotten more excited . 
now , a group of researchers has announced the first detection of a gravitational-wave signal created by a collision involving an object larger than the largest known neutron star but smaller than the smallest known black hole . 
although the detection is too complicated for scientists to ever hope to pin down precisely what happened , the signal raises hopes for more strange observations to come . 
this detection could even herald a new understanding of how massive stellar explosions called supernovas happen.its a fantastic event , it will really change how we understand the formation of black holes and neutron stars , christopher berry , a gravitational wave astronomer at northwestern university and the university of glasgow and co-author on the new research , told space.com . 
it will remain a mystery until we can get more observations , but that doesnt mean its not informative.related : the search for gravitational waves in imagesan artists depiction of the heavily asymmetrical collision observed through gravitational waves . 
( image credit : n. fischer , s. ossokine , h. pfeiffer , a. buonanno ( max planck institute for gravitational physics ) , simulating extreme spacetimes ( sxs ) collaboration ) were very confident in the results , this is a really beautiful signal , he said . 
its a wonderful , clean chirp if you look at the data . 
i couldnt believe it the first time i saw it , its stunning.scientists caught the gravitational wave , or the chirp , on aug. 14 , 2019 and were further intrigued when initial analysis suggested that the collision could have merged a black hole and a neutron star . 
the collision of those two objects is a type of gravitational wave event that scientists have eagerly been awaiting , since so far they have only seen mergers of matched pairs.but as the astrophysicists ran more analyses on the data , they realized they were looking at something even stranger . 
according to scientists analysis of the merger event , one of the colliding objects was about 23 times the mass of our sun — thats a black hole — and the other about 2.6 times the mass of our sun — thats a … well , thats something.mass-gap mystery a chart depicting the range of collision events observed through gravitational waves . 
the bottom section of the image shows neutron-star-size objects ; the top section shows black-hole-size objects . 
the new detection , highlighted here , involved a black hole and what is either a very large neutron star or a very small black hole . 
( image credit : ligo-virgo/ frank elavsky & aaron geller ( northwestern ) ) this size falls into what scientists call the mass gap : an object significantly smaller than any black hole studied to date ( about 5 times the mass of the sun ) , but also probably larger than any known neutron star ( about 2.5 times the mass of the sun ) .mergers of a mixed nature — black holes and neutron stars — have been predicted for decades , but this compact object in the mass gap is a complete surprise , co-author vicky kalogera , an astrophysicist at northwestern university , said in a statement . 
even though we cant classify the object with conviction , we have seen either the heaviest known neutron star or the lightest known black hole . 
either way , it breaks a record.under other circumstances , scientists may have been able to determine what the object actually was before the collision that created the observable chirp . 
but fate didnt cooperate here . 
scientists didnt spot any light signal that a neutron star could have produced — but that doesnt rule out that it could have been a neutron star.and unlike the generally well-matched collisions scientists have studied to date , this pair is hugely uneven , with the larger object containing about nine times the mass of the smaller one , making it even more difficult for scientists to see details of the event in the gravitational wave chirp . 
i think of pac-man eating a little dot , kalogera said in the statement . 
when the masses are highly asymmetric , the smaller compact object can be eaten by the black hole in one bite.the event was also difficult to study because it was quite far away . 
the collision appears to have occurred about 800 million light-years away from earth — for context , thats about six times more distant than the binary neutron star merger detected in august 2017 by its accompanying flash of light.because of these challenges , to really crack the mystery of the cosmic mass gap , scientists will need to observe more of these borderline objects in more collisions , preferably collisions that arent quite so complicated to analyze . 
a more equal-mass binary would be great , one closer even better , berry said.an artists depiction of two black holes , one more than nine times more massive than the other , spiraling into each other and colliding . 
( image credit : n. fischer , s. ossokine , h. pfeiffer , a. buonanno ( max planck institute for gravitational physics ) , simulating extreme spacetimes ( sxs ) collaboration ) and pinning down the fuzzy realm between neutron star and black hole isnt important just for precisions sake , berry said : it will change our understanding of the universe around us.for one thing , it will tell scientists about how neutron stars — which berry called the ultimate particle colliders — work . 
neutron star matter is very difficult to model , he said . 
its nothing we can simulate here on earth , the conditions are too extreme . 
but the properties of that matter will determine the maximum size of a neutron star , the point at which a large neutron star becomes too large and collapses , the boundary that observations like this new research will help pin down.and understanding the mass gap ( or lack thereof ) would ripple through astrophysics far beyond these observations , berry said . 
for decades now , astrophysics models have assumed that there is indeed a gap between the largest neutron stars and the smallest black holes . 
if that gap turns out to be significantly smaller than previously assumed , or nonexistent , those models will need to be tweaked . 
those tweaked models could change our understanding of the universe more broadly than the mass gap definition itself , berry said.however the mass gap mystery unfolds , this new signal points to the rich future of gravitational wave observations , berry said.this is testament to the fact that we are only just starting to explore the universe with gravitational waves , he said . 
we dont know whats out there . 
weve seen some of the more common sources now , we know what the typical type of gravitational waves are . 
but the full complexity , what the rare beasts in the jungle are , were still trying to find out.the research is described in a paper published today ( june 23 ) in astrophysical journal letters . 
in images : the amazing discovery of a neutron-star crash , gravitational waves & more the universe remembers gravitational waves — and we can find them with new gravitational-wave detectors , more cosmic mysteries will be solved email meghan bartels at mbartels @ space.com or follow her @ meghanbartels . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . 
.offer : save 45 % on all about space how it works and all about history ! . 
for a limited time , you can take out a digital subscription to any of our best-selling science magazines for just $ 2.38 per month , or 45 % off the standard price for the first three months.view deal . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
meghan bartelssocial links navigationsenior writermeghan is a senior writer at space.com and has more than five years experience as a science journalist based in new york city . 
she joined space.com in july 2018 , with previous writing published in outlets including newsweek and audubon . 
meghan earned an ma in science journalism from new york university and a ba in classics from georgetown university , and in her free time she enjoys reading and visiting museums . 
follow her on twitter at @ meghanbartels . 
see all comments ( 1 ) . 
comment from the forums . 
why not a dark matter object falling into a black hole ? 
they both have gravity . 
of course , i dont know anything about this . 
so , perhaps someone could explain it to me . 
view all 1 comment . 
more from space.1europes juice jupiter spacecraft arrives at spaceport ahead of april launch2sun storm may supercharge auroras for valentines day3what is the u.s. space force and what does it do ? 4the polaris program : one big step for civilian spaceflight5earth-size exoplanet spotted just 72 light-years away . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
what happens at the center of a black hole ? 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view deal . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
what happens at the center of a black hole ? . 
by paul sutter last updated 9 february 2022 . 
all of the possibilities are very weird . 
artists illustration of a black hole . 
( image credit : shutterstock ) . 
jump to : . 
lets go for a spin . 
paul m. sutter is an astrophysicist at suny stony brook and the flatiron institute , host of ask a spaceman and space radio , and author of how to die in space . 
sutter contributed this article to space.coms expert voices : op-ed & insights.the singularity at the center of a black hole is the ultimate no mans land : a place where matter is compressed down to an infinitely tiny point , and all conceptions of time and space completely break down . 
and it doesnt really exist . 
something has to replace the singularity , but were not exactly sure what . 
lets explore some possibilities.related : black holes of the universe ( images ) planck starsit could be that deep inside a black hole , matter doesnt get squished down to an infinitely tiny point . 
instead , there could be a smallest possible configuration of matter , the tiniest possible pocket of volume.this is called a planck star , and its a theoretical possibility envisioned by loop quantum gravity , which is itself a highly hypothetical proposal for creating a quantum version of gravity . 
in the world of loop quantum gravity , space and time are quantized — the universe around us is composed of tiny discrete chunks , but at such an incredibly tiny scale that our movements appear smooth and continuous.this theoretical chunkiness of space-time provides two benefits . 
one , it takes the dream of quantum mechanics to its ultimate conclusion , explaining gravity in a natural way . 
and two , it makes it impossible for singularities to form inside black holes.as matter squishes down under the immense gravitational weight of a collapsing star , it meets resistance . 
the discreteness of space-time prevents matter from reaching anything smaller than the planck length ( around 1.68 times 10^-35 meters ) . 
all the material that has ever fallen into the black hole gets compressed into a ball not much bigger than this . 
perfectly microscopic , but definitely not infinitely tiny.this resistance to continued compression eventually forces the material to un-collapse ( i.e. , explode ) , making black holes only temporary objects . 
but because of the extreme time dilation effects around black holes , from our perspective in the outside universe it takes billions , even trillions , of years before they go boom . 
so were all set for now.related : what is gravity ? gravastarsanother attempt to eradicate the singularity — one that doesnt rely on untested theories of quantum gravity — is known as the gravastar . 
its such a theoretical concept that my spell checker didnt even recognize the word . 
the difference between a black hole and a gravastar is that , instead of a singularity , the gravastar is filled with dark energy . 
dark energy is a substance that permeates space-time , causing it to expand outward . 
it sounds like sci-fi , but its real : dark energy is currently in operation in the larger cosmos , causing our entire universe to accelerate in its expansion.as matter falls onto a gravastar , it isnt able to actually penetrate the event horizon ( due to all that dark energy on the inside ) and therefore just hangs out on the surface . 
but outside that surface , gravastars look and act like normal black holes . 
( a black holes event horizon is its point of no return — the boundary beyond which nothing , not even light , can escape . 
) however , recent observations of merging black holes with gravitational wave detectors have potentially ruled out the existence of gravastars , because merging gravastars will give a different signal than merging black holes , and outfits like ligo ( the laser interferometer gravitational-wave observatory ) and virgo are getting more and more examples by the day . 
while gravastars arent exactly a no-go in our universe , they are definitely on thin ice.the universe : big bang to now in 10 easy stepsrelated stories : — what are black holes ? 
facts , theories and definition . 
— einsteins theory of general relativity . 
— the hunt for wormholes : how scientists look for space-time tunnelslets go for a spinplanck stars and gravastars may have awesome names , but the reality of their existence is in doubt . 
so maybe theres a more mundane explanation for singularities , one thats based on a more nuanced — and realistic — view of black holes in our universe.the idea of a single point of infinite density comes from our conception of stationary , non-rotating , uncharged , rather boring black holes . 
real black holes are much more interesting characters , especially when they spin.the spin of a rotating black hole stretches the singularity into a ring . 
and according to the math of einsteins theory of general relativity ( which is the only math weve got ) , once you pass through the ring singularity , you enter a wormhole and pop out through a white hole ( the polar opposite of a black hole , where nothing can enter and matter rushes out at the speed of light ) into an entirely new and exciting patch of the universe.one challenge : the interiors of rotating black holes are catastrophically unstable . 
and this is according to the very same math that leads to the prediction of the traveling-to-a-new-universe stuff.the problem with rotating black holes is that , well , they rotate . 
the singularity , stretched into a ring , is rotating at such a fantastic pace that it has incredible centrifugal force . 
and in general relativity , strong enough centrifugal forces act like antigravity : they push , not pull.this creates a boundary inside the black hole , called the inner horizon . 
outside this region , radiation is falling inward toward the singularity , compelled by the extreme gravitational pull . 
but radiation is pushed by the antigravity near the ring singularity , and the turning point is the inner horizon . 
if you were to encounter the inner horizon , you would face a wall of infinitely energetic radiation — the entire past history of the universe , blasted into your face in less than a blink of an eye.the formation of an inner horizon sows the seeds for the destruction of the black hole . 
but rotating black holes certainly exist in our universe , so that tells us that our math is wrong and something funky is going on.whats really happening inside a black hole ? 
we dont know — and the scary part is that we may never know.additional resourcesyou can learn more about black holes at this nasa explainer page . 
this bbc earth piece has good basic information about black holes as well , and it also describes what would happen to you if you fell into one of these light-gobbling monsters . 
and the stanford encyclopedia of philosophy has a good , detailed breakdown of black holes and singularities . 
bibliographyrovelli , c. and vidotto , f , 2014 . 
planck stars , international journal of modern physics d , vol . 
23 , no . 
12. https : //doi.org/10.1142/s0218271814420267sakai , n. et al , 2014 . 
gravastar shadows , physical review d , vol . 
90. https : //journals.aps.org/prd/abstract/10.1103/physrevd.90.104013taylor , e. and wheeler , j . 
exploring black holes : introduction to general relativity . 
addison wesley longman , 2000. https : //www.amazon.com/exploring-black-holes-introduction-relativity/dp/020138423x .editors note : this story was first published on oct. 27 , 2020 . 
it was updated and republished on feb. 8 , 2022.learn more by listening to the episode what really happens at the center of a black hole ? 
on the ask a spaceman podcast , available on itunes . 
and on the web at http : //www.askaspaceman.com . 
thanks to andy p. , brittany , jeff j. , robert s. , vladimir b. , jack s. , @ grobillard , and james l. for the questions that led to this piece ! 
ask your own question on twitter using # askaspaceman or by following paul @ paulmattsutter . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
paul suttersocial links navigationspace.com contributorpaul m. sutter is an astrophysicist at suny stony brook and the flatiron institute in new york city . 
paul received his phd in physics from the university of illinois at urbana-champaign in 2011 , and spent three years at the paris institute of astrophysics , followed by a research fellowship in trieste , italy , his research focuses on many diverse topics , from the emptiest regions of the universe to the earliest moments of the big bang to the hunt for the first stars . 
as an agent to the stars , paul has passionately engaged the public in science outreach for several years . 
he is the host of the popular ask a spaceman ! 
podcast , author of your place in the universe and how to die in space and he frequently appears on tv — including on the weather channel , for which he serves as official space specialist . 
more from space.1be hypnotized by this mesmerizing blue and gold spiral galaxy ( photo ) 2russian progress cargo craft at space station springs a leak 3hubble captures dazzling star cluster that may soon disperse4india tests recovery of spacecraft for gaganyaan astronaut mission ( photos ) 5russian cargo ship arrives at space station after 2-day orbital trek . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
will our black hole eat the milky way ? . 
science x account . 
click here to sign in with . 
forget password ? . 
not a member ? . 
astronomy & space . 
share this ! . 
astronomy & space . 
august 16 , 2016. . 
will our black hole eat the milky way ? . 
by fraser cain , . 
sagittarius a * . 
credit : chandra . 
want to hear something cool ? 
theres a black hole at the center of the milky way . 
and not just any black hole , its a supermassive black hole with more than 4.1 million times the mass of the sun . 
its right over there , in the direction of the sagittarius constellation . 
located just 26,000 light-years away . 
and as we speak , its in the process of tearing apart entire stars and star systems , occasionally consuming them , adding to its mass like a voracious shark . 
wait , that doesnt sound cool , that sort of sounds a little scary . 
dont worry , you have absolutely nothing to worry about , unless you plan to live for quadrillions of years , which i do , thanks to my future robot body . 
im ready for my singularity , dr. kurzweil . 
is the supermassive black hole going to consume the milky way ? 
if not , why not ? 
if so , why so ? . 
the discovery of a supermassive black hole at the heart of the milky way , and really almost all galaxies , is one of my favorite discoveries in the field of astronomy . 
its one of those insights that simultaneously answered some questions , and opened up even more . 
back in the 1970s , the astronomers bruce balick and robert brown realized that there was an intense source of radio emissions coming from the very center of the milky way , in the constellation sagittarius . 
credit : universe today . 
they designated it sgr a * . 
the asterisk stands for exciting . 
you think im joking , but im not . 
for once , im not joking . 
in 2002 , astronomers observed that there were stars zipping past this object , like comets on elliptical paths going around the sun . 
imagine the mass of our sun , and the tremendous power it would take to wrench a star like that around . 
the only objects with that much density and gravity are black holes , but in this case , a black hole with millions of times the mass of our own sun : a supermassive black hole . 
with the discovery of the milky ways supermassive black hole , astronomers found evidence that there are black holes at the heart of every galaxy . 
at the same time , the discovery of supermassive black holes helped answer one of the big questions in astronomy : what are quasars ? 
we did a whole article on them , but theyre intensely bright objects , generating enough light they can be seen billions of light-years away . 
giving off more energy than the rest of their own galaxy combined . 
it turns out that quasars and supermassive black holes are the same thing . 
quasars are just black holes in the process of actively feeding ; gobbling up so much material it piles up in an accretion disk around it . 
once again , these do sound terrifying . 
but are we in any danger ? . 
in the short term , no . 
the black hole at the center of the milky way is 26,000 light-years away . 
even if it turned into a quasar and started eating stars , you wouldnt even be able to notice it from this distance . 
an illustration of saggitarius a * . 
credit : nasa/cxc/m.weiss . 
a black hole is just a concentration of mass in a very small region , which things orbit around . 
to give you an example , you could replace the sun with a black hole with the exact same mass , and nothing would change . 
i mean , wed all freeze because there wasnt a sun in the sky anymore , but the earth would continue to orbit this black hole in exactly the same orbit , for billions of years . 
same goes with the black hole at the center of the milky way . 
its not pulling material in like a vacuum cleaner , it serves as a gravitational anchor for a group of stars to orbit around , for billions of years . 
in order for a black hole to actually consume a star , it needs to make a direct hit . 
to get within the event horizon , which is only about 17 times bigger than the sun . 
if a star gets close , without hitting , itll get torn apart , but still , it doesnt happen very often . 
the problem happens when these stars interact with one another through their own gravity , and mess with each others orbits . 
a star that would have been orbiting happily for billions of years might get deflected into a collision course with the black hole . 
but this happens very rarely . 
over the short term , that supermassive black hole is totally harmless . 
especially from out here in the galactic suburbs . 
but there are a few situations that might cause some problems over vast periods of time . 
the first panic will happen when the milky way collides with andromeda in about 4 billion years – lets call this mess milkdromeda . 
suddenly , youll have two whole clouds of stars interacting in all kinds of ways , like an unstable blended family . 
stars that would have been safe will careen past other stars and be deflected down into the maw of either of the two supermassive black holes on hand . 
andromedas black hole could be 100 million times the mass of the sun , so its a bigger target for stars with a death wish . 
the quasar sdss j1106+1939 has the most energetic outflows ever seen , at least five times more powerful than any that have been observed to date . 
credit : eso/l . 
over the coming billions , trillions and quadrillions of years , more and more galaxies will collide with milkdromeda , bringing new supermassive black holes and more stars to the chaos . 
so many opportunities for mayhem . 
of course , the sun will die in about 5 billion years , so this future wont be our problem . 
well , fine , with my eternal robot body , it might still be my problem . 
after our neighborhood is completely out of galaxies to consume , then there will just be countless eons of time for stars to interact for orbit after orbit . 
some will get flung out of milkdromeda , some will be hurled down into the black hole . 
and others will be safe , assuming they can avoid this fate over the googol years itll take for the supermassive black hole to finally evaporate . 
thats a 1 followed by 100 zeroes years . 
thats a really really long time , so now i dont like those odds . 
for our purposes , the black hole at the heart of the milky way is completely and totally safe . 
in the lifetime of the sun , it wont interact with us in any way , or consume more than a handful of stars . 
but over the vast eons , it could be a different story . 
i hope we can be around to find out the answer . 
.will our black hole eat the milky way ? 
( 2016 , august 16 ) . 
.retrieved 17 february 2023 . 
.from https : //phys.org/news/2016-08-black-hole-milky.html . 
this document is subject to copyright . 
apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private study or research , no . 
part may be reproduced without the written permission . 
the content is provided for information purposes only . 
image : computer simulation of a supermassive black hole . 
feedback to editors . 
grooming handclasp in chimpanzees found to be culturally transmitted . 
14 hours ago . 
conducting supercooled droplet experiments to design and engineer superhydrophobic ice-repellent surfaces . 
14 hours ago . 
neanderthal genes may have helped early humans adapt to differences in eurasian daylight hours . 
14 hours ago . 
indian astronomers inspect open cluster teutsch 76 in detail . 
17 hours ago . 
researchers observe a bubble phase of composite fermions . 
19 hours ago . 
study demonstrates energy-efficient conversion of nitrate pollutants into ammonia . 
10 hours ago . 
study quantifies global impact of electricity in dust storms on mars . 
10 hours ago . 
researchers develop light-controlled drugs for future precision therapies against diseases such as cancer . 
11 hours ago . 
smooth sailing for electrons in graphene : measuring fluid-like flow at nanometer resolution . 
11 hours ago . 
perovskites , a dirt cheap alternative to silicon , just got a lot more efficient . 
11 hours ago . 
newly identified tsetse fly pheromone may help in curbing disease spread . 
12 hours ago . 
flash joule technique efficiently turns would-be pollution into valuable nanomaterials . 
12 hours ago . 
slow motion : scientists investigate tectonic plate boundary earthquake behavior . 
13 hours ago . 
antarctica sea ice melts to a record low . 
14 hours ago . 
grooming handclasp in chimpanzees found to be culturally transmitted . 
14 hours ago . 
image : computer simulation of a supermassive black hole . 
apr 7 , 2016. . 
where is the closest black hole ? . 
mar 21 , 2016. . 
could the milky way become a quasar ? . 
feb 27 , 2015. . 
how massive can black holes get ? . 
aug 11 , 2015. . 
hubble image : the sleeping giant . 
feb 11 , 2016. . 
rare galaxy with 2 black holes has 1 starved of stars . 
jan 5 , 2016. . 
recommended for you . 
indian astronomers inspect open cluster teutsch 76 in detail . 
17 hours ago . 
polarized shockwaves shake the universes cosmic web . 
17 hours ago . 
new aurorae detected on jupiters four largest moons . 
14 hours ago . 
a star is born : images of nearby galaxies provide clues about star formation . 
14 hours ago . 
tadpole molecular cloud appears to be playing around black hole . 
16 hours ago . 
scientists find first evidence that black holes are the source of dark energy . 
feb 15 , 2023. . 
.load comments ( 1 ) . 
let us know if there is a problem with our content . 
.use this form if you have come across a typo , inaccuracy or would like to send an edit request for the content on this page . 
.for general inquiries , please use our contact form . 
.for general feedback , use the public comments section below ( please adhere to guidelines ) . 
please select the most appropriate category to facilitate processing of your request . 
-- please select one -- . 
compliments / critique . 
typos / errors / inaccuracies . 
edit / removal request . 
your message to the editors . 
your email ( only if you want to be contacted back ) . 
thank you for taking time to provide your feedback to the editors . 
your feedback is important to us . 
however , we do not guarantee individual replies due to the high volume of messages . 
e-mail the story . 
will our black hole eat the milky way ? . 
your friends email . 
i would like to subscribe to science x newsletter . 
your email address is used only to let the recipient know who sent the email . 
neither your address nor the recipients address will be used for any other purpose . 
.the information you enter will appear in your e-mail message and is not retained by phys.org in any form . 
newsletter sign up . 
.get weekly and/or daily updates delivered to your inbox . 
.you can unsubscribe at any time and well never share your details to third parties . 
medical research advances and health news . 
the latest engineering , electronics and technology advances . 
the most comprehensive sci-tech news coverage on the web . 
science x daily and the weekly email newsletter are free features that allow you to receive your favorite sci-tech news updates in your email inbox . 
science x account . 
© phys.org 2003 - 2023 powered by science x network . 
terms of use . 
this site uses cookies to assist with navigation , analyse your use of our services , collect data for ads personalisation and provide content from third parties . 
by using our site , you acknowledge that you have read and understand our privacy policy . 
and terms of use . 
ok. cookie options . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingmeteorite from european fireball ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy . 
by stefanie waldek published 16 february 2023 . 
the origin of dark energy has been perplexing scientists for decades . 
comments ( 6 ) . 
an illustration of a black hole . 
( image credit : mark garlick/science photo library/getty images ) . 
when astronomers discovered that the universe is expanding at an accelerating rate , they theorized that some force must be pushing things farther apart and overcoming gravity , which should be slowing things down . 
that force was suggested to be dark energy , but no one has ever figured out from where it comes.but a team of 17 international researchers led by the university of hawaii has discovered the first evidence for the origin point of dark energy : black holes.black holes acquire mass in two ways : accretion of gas and mergers with other black holes . 
but in studying nine billion years of black hole evolution in dormant giant elliptical galaxies , the researchers discovered that the older black holes are much larger than they should be based on those two methods of growth . 
that means there must be another way these black holes are acquiring mass . 
researchers suggest the answer is dark energy in the form of vacuum energy , a kind of energy included in spacetime itself . 
[ that ] pushes the universe further apart , accelerating the expansion , according to a statement .related : black holes : everything you need to knowif the theory holds , then this is going to revolutionize the whole of cosmology , because at last weve got a solution for the origin of dark energy thats been perplexing cosmologists and theoretical physicists for more than 20 years , dr. chris pearson of stfc ral space , a co-author of a study on the discovery , said in a statement.related stories : — galactic collisions act as a cosmic delivery service for hungry monster black holes — star survives spaghettification by black hole — black holes at galactic centers blast out 10 times more light than previously thoughtthe idea that black holes are a source of dark energy isnt new . 
in fact , its part of einsteins theory of general relativity . 
but this is the first time astronomers have obtained observational evidence to support the theory.were really saying two things at once : that theres evidence the typical black hole solutions dont work for you on a long , long timescale , and we have the first proposed astrophysical source for dark energy , said study author duncan farrah , university of hawaii astronomer , in the statement.a paper on the teams research was published in the astrophysical journal letters . 
on wednesday ( feb 15 ) .follow stefanie waldek on twitter @ stefaniewaldek . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom . 
and on facebook . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
stefanie waldeksocial links navigationcontributing writerspace.com contributing writer stefanie waldek is a self-taught space nerd and aviation geek who is passionate about all things spaceflight and astronomy . 
with a background in travel and design journalism , as well as a bachelor of arts degree from new york university , she specializes in the budding space tourism industry and earth-based astrotourism . 
in her free time , you can find her watching rocket launches or looking up at the stars , wondering what is out there . 
learn more about her work at www.stefaniewaldek.com . 
see all comments ( 6 ) . 
comment from the forums . 
the explainer video in the article explained exactly . 
is the space inside , say , a galaxy growing but overcome by the gravitational attraction between the stars ? 
the answer is no . 
space within any gravitationally bound system is unaffected by the surrounding expansion . 
buhz2k9dyhy:356view : https : //youtu.be/buhz2k9dyhy ? t=356 . 
sabine hossenfelder : the solution of general relativity that describes the expanding universe is a solution on average ; it is good only on very large distances . 
but the solutions that describe galaxies are different - and just dont expand . 
its not that galaxies expand unnoticeably , they just dont . 
the full solution , then , is both stitched together : expanding space between non-expanding galaxies.it is only somewhere beyond the scales of galaxy clusters that expansion takes over . 
http : //backreaction.blogspot.bg/2017/08/you-dont-expand-just-because-universe.html . 
so cosmologists apply the expansion solutions only to voids deprived of galaxies ; to galaxies and galactic clusters they apply nonexpansion solutions . 
why do cosmologists resort to this trick ? 
because , if they applied expansion solutions to galaxies and galactic clusters , observations would immediately disprove the expansion theory . 
here is why : . 
if expansion is actual inside galaxies and galactic clusters , the competition between expansion and gravitational attraction would distort those cosmic structures - e.g . 
fringes only weakly bound by gravity would succumb to expansion and fly away . 
and the theory , if it takes into account the intragalactic expansion , will have to predict the distortions . 
but no distortions are observed - there is really no expansion inside galaxies and galactic clusters . 
and cosmologists , without much publicity , have simply made the theory consistent with this fact . 
since there is no expansion inside galaxies and galactic clusters , there is no expansion anywhere else . 
the so called cosmological ( hubble ) redshift is due to the speed of light slowing down as photons travel through vacuum , in a non-expanding universe . 
this is not a totally unacceptable idea : . 
some physicists , however , suggest that there might be one other cosmic factor that could influence the speed of light : quantum vacuum fluctuation . 
this theory holds that so-called empty spaces in the universe arent actually empty - theyre teeming with particles that are just constantly changing from existent to non-existent states . 
quantum fluctuations , therefore , could slow down the speed of light . 
https : //www.sciencealert.com/how-much-do-we-really-know-about-the-speed-of-light . 
black holes are the transformers of the universe . 
works like vacuum cleaners . 
it is a ` null ` energy . 
they balance the universal yin/yang energy . 
what goes in generally negative energy and turns back into universe as positive energy . 
if the negative energy is stubborn to be transformed , it can stay in there as in an infinite loop . 
can be called ` lost in space ` but it is a one way ticket . 
because inside is null energy , and vacuums the negative you can not call it dark energy . 
it works for all positive . 
or : we dont understand gravity , and for that reason and others dont know how far away things really are and all of this is just nonsense . 
admin said : black holes may be the origin of dark energy , according to a study by a team of researchers led by the university of hawaii . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy : read morei dont understand how black holes would cause repulsion instead of pulling the universe closer together . 
the new theory that preceded this new observation . 
i would like to bring to your attention my paper on researchgate in 2018 about my idea that dark matter is actually caused by black holes . 
the idea is that black holes consume the vacuum energy , which has the effect of drawing inwards all embedded matter ( stars , planets etc ) in the space surrounding the black holes . 
thus an apparent extra inward acceleration which is constant with distance is produced and can explain galaxy rotation rates . 
it also explains other phenomena such as the apparent lopsided halos of dark matter that seem to exist . 
you can read about why this occurs and other details in my paper here : . 
an explanation for galaxy rotation rates without requiring dark matter . 
https : //www.researchgate.net/publication/326988843_an_explanation_for_galaxy_rotation_rates_without_requiring_dark_matter . 
declan traill bsc ( melb ) . 
view all 6 comments . 
show more comments . 
more from space.1japans new h3 rocket aborts 1st-ever launch attempt2virgin galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202133 mystery objects shot down by us likely werent spy craft , biden says4black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy5pictures from space ! 
our image of the day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
black holes | science mission directorate . 
skip to main content . 
nasa science mission directorate . 
share the science . 
ask a question . 
science topicsuniversesolar systemsunearthspace experimentsmissionsscience-enabling technologylunar discovery and explorationscience activationnewsscience @ nasapress releaseswatchsciencecastswe asked a nasa expertnasa science liveez sciencefor researchersoverviewfaqsolicitationssmd bridge programroses blognac science committeenasa postdoc programteampi resourcesscience datahelp & supportsuborbital programuaplearnersoverviewteamsresourcessme mapopportunitiesnewshighlightshotlinespace placeget involvednasa science at homeart and scienceupcoming eventsconnectemail sign upfollow usresourcestoolkitsvisual presentations citizen scienceprojectshighlightspublicationsnasa citizen scientistsabout usoverviewleadershippeopleresourcesscience strategyworkforce initiativescareersideaconnectcommunicationscontact usespañolscience in spanish . 
learn more about this image . 
what we study . 
what we study . 
dark energy , dark matter . 
the big bang . 
dont let the name fool you : a black hole is anything but empty space . 
rather , it is a great amount of matter packed into a very small area - think of a star ten times more massive than the sun squeezed into a sphere approximately the diameter of new york city . 
the result is a gravitational field so strong that nothing , not even light , can escape . 
in recent years , nasa instruments have painted a new picture of these strange objects that are , to many , the most fascinating objects in space . 
intense x-ray flares thought to be caused by a black hole devouring a star . 
( video ) . 
watch the video . 
the idea of an object in space so massive and dense that light could not escape it has been around for centuries . 
most famously , black holes were predicted by einsteins theory of general relativity , which showed that when a massive star dies , it leaves behind a small , dense remnant core . 
if the cores mass is more than about three times the mass of the sun , the equations showed , the force of gravity overwhelms all other forces and produces a black hole . 
a video about black holes . 
watch the video . 
scientists cant directly observe black holes with telescopes that detect x-rays , light , or other forms of electromagnetic radiation . 
we can , however , infer the presence of black holes and study them by detecting their effect on other matter nearby . 
if a black hole passes through a cloud of interstellar matter , for example , it will draw matter inward in a process known as accretion . 
a similar process can occur if a normal star passes close to a black hole . 
in this case , the black hole can tear the star apart as it pulls it toward itself . 
as the attracted matter accelerates and heats up , it emits x-rays that radiate into space . 
recent discoveries offer some tantalizing evidence that black holes have a dramatic influence on the neighborhoods around them - emitting powerful gamma ray bursts , devouring nearby stars , and spurring the growth of new stars in some areas while stalling it in others . 
one stars end is a black holes beginning . 
most black holes form from the remnants of a large star that dies in a supernova explosion . 
( smaller stars become dense neutron stars , which are not massive enough to trap light . ) 
if the total mass of the star is large enough ( about three times the mass of the sun ) , it can be proven theoretically that no force can keep the star from collapsing under the influence of gravity . 
however , as the star collapses , a strange thing occurs . 
as the surface of the star nears an imaginary surface called the event horizon , time on the star slows relative to the time kept by observers far away . 
when the surface reaches the event horizon , time stands still , and the star can collapse no more - it is a frozen collapsing object . 
astronomers have identified a candidate for the smallest-known black hole . 
( video ) . 
watch the video . 
even bigger black holes can result from stellar collisions . 
soon after its launch in december 2004 , nasas swift telescope observed the powerful , fleeting flashes of light known as gamma ray bursts . 
chandra and nasas hubble space telescope later collected data from the events afterglow , and together the observations led astronomers to conclude that the powerful explosions can result when a black hole and a neutron star collide , producing another black hole . 
babies and giants . 
although the basic formation process is understood , one perennial mystery in the science of black holes is that they appear to exist on two radically different size scales . 
on the one end , there are the countless black holes that are the remnants of massive stars . 
peppered throughout the universe , these stellar mass black holes are generally 10 to 24 times as massive as the sun . 
astronomers spot them when another star draws near enough for some of the matter surrounding it to be snared by the black holes gravity , churning out x-rays in the process . 
most stellar black holes , however , are very difficult to detect . 
judging from the number of stars large enough to produce such black holes , however , scientists estimate that there are as many as ten million to a billion such black holes in the milky way alone . 
on the other end of the size spectrum are the giants known as supermassive black holes , which are millions , if not billions , of times as massive as the sun . 
astronomers believe that supermassive black holes lie at the center of virtually all large galaxies , even our own milky way . 
astronomers can detect them by watching for their effects on nearby stars and gas . 
this chart shows the relative masses of super-dense cosmic objects . 
read the full article . 
historically , astronomers have long believed that no mid-sized black holes exist . 
however , recent evidence from chandra , xmm-newton and hubble strengthens the case that mid-size black holes do exist . 
one possible mechanism for the formation of supermassive black holes involves a chain reaction of collisions of stars in compact star clusters that results in the buildup of extremely massive stars , which then collapse to form intermediate-mass black holes . 
the star clusters then sink to the center of the galaxy , where the intermediate-mass black holes merge to form a supermassive black hole . 
december 20 , 2022 . 
nasa gets unusual close glimpse of black hole snacking on star . 
november 23 , 2022 . 
ixpe helps solve black hole jet mystery . 
november 21 , 2022 . 
listen to the light echoes from a black hole . 
november 10 , 2022 . 
magnetic fields help black holes reach deeper into galaxies . 
november 3 , 2022 . 
ixpe reveals shape , orientation of hot matter around black hole . 
october 13 , 2022 . 
swift , fermi missions detect exceptional cosmic blast . 
august 18 , 2022 . 
nasa telescopes capture stellar delivery service for black hole ( ngc 4424 ) . 
june 30 , 2022 . 
chandra shows giant black hole spins slower than its peers ( h1821+243 ) . 
june 10 , 2022 . 
hubble determines mass of isolated black hole roaming our milky way galaxy . 
may 12 , 2022 . 
nasa telescopes support event horizon telescope in studying milky ways black hole ( sagittarius a * ) . 
may 5 , 2022 . 
swift tracks potential magnetic flip of monster black hole . 
may 4 , 2022 . 
new nasa black hole sonifications with a remix . 
april 20 , 2022 . 
black holes raze thousands of stars to fuel growth . 
april 13 , 2022 . 
hubble sheds light on origins of supermassive black holes . 
april 7 , 2022 . 
fermi hunts for gravitational waves from monster black holes . 
march 31 , 2022 . 
feasting black holes caught in galactic spiderweb ( spiderweb galaxy field ) . 
february 22 , 2022 . 
how magnetic fields help feed a supermassive black hole . 
january 19 , 2022 . 
hubble finds a black hole igniting star formation in a dwarf galaxy . 
january 10 , 2022 . 
mini monster black hole could hold clues to giants growth ( mrk 462 ) . 
december 16 , 2021 . 
astronomers spy quartet of cavities from giant black holes : rbs 797 . 
december 9 , 2021 . 
mini-jet found near milky ways supermassive black hole . 
november 10 , 2021 . 
black holes can tell us the expansion rate of the universe . 
september 16 , 2021 . 
jingle , pluck , and hum : sounds from space . 
august 5 , 2021 . 
huge rings around a black hole ( v404 cygni ) . 
what we study . 
dark energy , dark matterblack holesthe big banggalaxiesstarsexoplanets . 
organization and staff 2020 decadal survey2022 senior review of operating missionsastrophysics fleet mission chart ( pdf ) astronomy picture of the daynight sky networkspacecraft paper models . 
field guide to black holesblack holes : gravitys relentless pullblack hole fact sheet and morelisten to a black hole . 
are we alone in the universe ? 
you ’ re . 
february 14 , 2023 . 
volunteers help discover the reddest . 
february 07 , 2023 . 
the scigirls become disk detectives . 
february 02 , 2023 . 
nasa wants you to help study planets . 
january 11 , 2023 . 
science newsscience at nasa . 
we asked a nasa expert . 
nac science committee . 
nasa postdoc program . 
help & support . 
get involvednasa science at home . 
art and science . 
email sign up . 
nasa citizen scientists . 
nasa official : dana bolles . 
last updated : february 17 , 2023 . 
ask a question . 
science topicsuniverseoverview2020 decadal surveyapd responses to decadalpre 2020 decadal reportslarge missionsprobe missionswhat we studydark energy , dark matterblack holesthe big banggalaxiesstarsexoplanetsprogramsphysics of the cosmoscosmic originsastrophysics explorersexoplanet explorationastrophysics researchastrophysics div technologyastrophysics pioneersmissionsscience questionshow does the universe work ? how did we get here ? are we alone ? astro dataheasarcmastnexscinedirsasimbadadsdocumentsastrophysics roadmapmeeting of expertssolar systemoverviewwhat we studyinner solar systemouter solar systemsmall bodies of the solar systemprogramsdiscoverylunar discovery & explorationmars explorationnew frontiersplanetary defense coordination officeouter planets & ocean worldssmall satssservimissionsscience questionshow did life begin and evolve on earth ? how did the solar system evolve ? how did the suns family originate ? what are the characteristics of the solar system ? documentsplanetary dataoverviewpde elementspde irbstatus updatesarchives/repositoriesopportunitiestraining toolkitsolar systemsunoverviewheliophysics leadershiphelio org chartsmd organization chartprogram officers listwhat we studyprogramsheliophysics researchballoonscubesatssolar terrestrial probesexplorersliving with a starsounding rocketsworking groupscitizen sciencetechnology programchimera : a hybrid search coil and fluxgate magnetometer for small spacecraft missionssolar cruiser : enabling new vistas for heliophysics sciencemissionsspace weatherspace weather strategyspace weather councilgap analysis reportsupplemental informationheliophysics 2024 decadal survey2050 workshopstrategic mission programshelio dataresourcesgeospace dynamics constellationdocuments and reportsmembershippublic commentsearthoverviewwhat we studyelementsflight programresearch and analysis programatmospheric compositionac missionsweatherwad missionsweather and atmospheric dynamics focus area publications and research highlightsour climateoceanographycvc missionsclimate variability & changeel niñoglobal water & energy cyclewec missionscarbon cycle & ecosystemscce missionscarbon cycle and ecosystems focus area publications and research highlightsour surfacea year in review : new earth discoveries in 2018accounting for internal variabilitychanges in global terrestrial water storage cclimate change changing ensoclimate change is speeding up the water cyclecold-intolerant plants are creeping farther northice losses from antarctica have tripled since 2012india overtakes china as top emitter of sulfur dioxidelinking ocean circulation and riverine carbon fluxlocal land subsidence increases flood risk in san francisco baysatellites detect undiscovered penguin populationssea surface salinity could provide new insight into severe stormsseeing the connection between neighboring volcanoes at depthwarm ocean waters off greenland put glaciers at more riska year in review : new earth discoveries in 2019a year in review : new earth discoveries in 2020esi missionsearth science research newsocean physics at nasaselected proposalsapplied sciences programcommon instrument interfacecii guidelines working meetingcii reference documentscii workshop 1cii workshop 2cii workshop 3essp program libraryestomissionsscience questionsearth dataevery day is earth dayresourcesglobal challengesapplications surveyeventsspace experimentsovervieworganizationstaff biosdecadal surveywhat we studyprogramsspace biologyanimal biologyanimal biology : what we studycell & molecular biology programdevelopmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programexperiments - animal biology programexperiments - cell & molecular biology programexperiments - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programexperiments - microbiology programexperiments - plant biology programhardware - animal biology programhardware - cell & molecular biology programhardware - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programhardware - microbiology programhardware - plant biology programmice behavior in space - animal biologymicrobiology programplant biology programpublications - animal biology programpublications - cell & molecular biology programpublications - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programpublications - microbiology programpublications - plant biology programspace biology science digestwhat we study - cell & molecular biology programwhat we study - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programwhat we study - microbiology programwhat we study - plant biology programphysical sciencesbiophysicscombustion sciencefluid physicsfundamental physicslife science flight projectsmaterials sciencestar 2020 participantsstar-2 ( 2021-2022 ) course participantsstar-3 ( 2022-2023 ) course participantssoft mattermissionsinvestigationsdatadocumentscommercialnews & mediawhat are the van allen belts and why do they matter ? missionsscience-enabling technologyoverviewsmd technology programstechnology highlightsoutput and resultsoverviewoverviewworkshop overviewforum agendagoogle docsspeaker presentations & videospeaker presentations & videossteering committeeorganizersspeakers and panelistsquestions & answerslunar discovery and explorationoverviewwhat we studyplanetary processesvolatile cyclesimpact history of earth/moonrecord of the ancient sunbiological systems on the moonphysical sciences on the moonplatform to the universeelementscommercial lunar payload serviceslunar instrument developmentsmallsats and cubesatslunar surface science mobility strategylunar reconnaissance orbiterapollo next generation sample analysisclps deliveriesto2-abto2-imto19cto19dto20a ( viper ) prime-1cp-11cp-12cs-3dataresourcesscience activationnewsscience @ nasapress releaseswatchsciencecastswe asked a nasa expertnasa science liveez sciencefor researchersoverviewnasa science social media consolidation faqfaqsolicitationssmd bridge programquestions and answers for smd bridge program workshop organizing committeeroses blognac science committeeoverviewmeetingsmembersscience advisory committeesastrophysics advisory committeeastrophysics analysis groupsearth science advisory committeeheliophysics advisory committeeplanetary science advisory committeeplanetary science analysis groupsbiological and physical sciences advisory committeeapplied sciences advisory committeesubcommitteesnasa postdoc programteamprogram officers listadvisory committeespi resources2021 virtual launchpad informationaccessibility statementaccessibility statementpi launchpad workshop contentpi launchpad workshop videospi launchpad : developing your first flight mission proposalpi launchpad : pre-application information sessionpi workshop sessionsquestions and answers about the pi launchpad 2021 virtual workshopquestions and answers about the pi launchpad 2023 in-person workshopresourcesscience mission directorate pi launchpad workshopscience datafaq for smd information policyopen-source science initiativeoverviewwhy do open science ? transform to open science ( tops ) smd ai initiativedata and computing architecture studyseries a workshopsseries c workshopsupcoming and past eventsopen-source science workshopoverviewagendacode of conductscience information policyhelp & supporthow to guidesvolunteer for review panelssuborbital programuaplearnersoverviewastrobiology standards alignmentsastrophysics standards alignmentsback to schoolearth science standards alignmentsheliophysics standards alignmentsplanetary science standards alignmentsthank you , teachers ! teamsexplore science activationscience activation teamsresourcessme mapnationwide eclipse ballooning project ( nebp ) ocean community engagement and awareness using nasa earth observations and science for hispanic/latino studentsopportunitiesnewshighlightshotlinespace placeget involvednasa science at homeart and scienceupcoming eventsconnectemail sign upfollow usresourcestoolkitsdiy - paper spacecraft modelsmission posters : solar systemnew horizons flybyvisual presentations earth day 2022citizen scienceprojectshighlightspublicationsnasa citizen scientistsabout usoverviewscience mission directorateleadershippeopleresourcesscience strategyscience strategydecadal surveysyear in review20152014201320122011201020082007200620052004workforce initiativesbest practices for establishing part-time/time-limited supervisory opportunitiesnew hires orientation workshoprotational program for scientistsscience career opportunities planning and exploration workshopscience career opportunities planning and exploration workshopcareersideaconnectcommunicationscontact usespañolscience in spanish . 
mysterious medium-size black holes may lurk at the centers of small galaxies | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.promotionprosheadingyour monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicepromotiondealpriceprefix $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
mysterious medium-size black holes may lurk at the centers of small galaxies . 
by charles q. choi published 23 may 2018 . 
an image of the galaxy messier 82 compiling data from nasas chandra x-ray observatory , hubble space telescope and spitzer space telescope . 
the intermediate-mass black hole m82 x-1 is the brightest object in the inset , at about 2 oclock near the galaxys center . 
( image credit : nasa/h . 
feng et al . ) . 
the hearts of small galaxies may hide a mysterious kind of black hole that has long proved elusive : medium-size black holes with masses between the mass of a few suns and that of millions of suns , a new study finds.over the decades , astronomers have detected many examples of two kinds of black holes : stellar-mass black holes and supermassive black holes . 
stellar-mass black holes are up to a few times the suns mass and are thought to arise when giant stars die and collapse in on themselves , whereas supermassive black holes are millions to billions of times the suns mass and form the hearts of most , if not all , large galaxies . 
much remains unknown about the origins of supermassive black holes ; they seem to have grown extraordinarily fast and appeared early in cosmic history , but researchers dont know exactly how . 
one theory involves intermediate-mass black holes — those with masses between 100 and 1 million solar masses — that previous research suggested might serve as the middle stages between stellar-mass and supermassive black holes . 
however , evidence for these missing links remains scant . 
[ the strangest black holes in the universe ] now , researchers say they may have detected 10 intermediate-mass black holes in the hearts of galaxies , including five that were previously unknown . 
these new findings suggest that intermediate-mass black holes may lurk within the centers of many small galaxies , the scientists said.intermediate-mass black holes are ubiquitous in the local universe , study lead author igor chilingarian , an astronomer at both the smithsonian astrophysical observatory in cambridge , massachusetts , and moscow state university in russia , told space.com . 
black holes are strange regions where gravity is strong enough to bend light , warp space and distort time . 
[ see how black holes work in this space.com infographic . ] 
( image credit : karl tate , space.com contributor ) black holes of any kind are challenging to spot because , as their name suggests , they are black , making them difficult to see against the blackness of space . 
one way to detect black holes indirectly is by looking for extraordinarily bright galactic cores . 
prior work suggested that these so-called active galactic nuclei are likely black holes that unleash vast amounts of energy as gigantic clouds of gas accrete or fall into them.to hunt for intermediate-mass black holes , the new studys researchers first analyzed data on about 1 million galaxies in the sloan digital sky survey , looking for the kind of light typically seen from accreting black holes . 
after they detected 305 potential intermediate-mass black holes residing in galactic cores , they searched data from the chandra , xmm-newton and swift orbital x-ray observatories for x-rays that would serve as strong evidence that these candidates were , in fact , intermediate-mass black holes.these are very faint sources of x-rays at the centers of galaxies , avi loeb , chair of astronomy at harvard university , told space.com . 
because theyre faint , they cant be seen at great distances , so the researchers had to look at the nearby universe . 
its very challenging to see these sources , because there are also stars at the centers of galaxies , and the researchers needed to distinguish these sources from stars all around it . 
this is why many of these sources were not seen before . 
loeb was not involved with the new study.the researchers detected 10 active galactic nuclei that they suggested were intermediate-mass black holes , ranging in mass from about 36,000 to 316,000 solar masses.these are the lowest-mass black holes at the centers of galaxies that we know about , loeb said . 
the detection of these intermediate-mass black holes in the centers of nearby dwarf galaxies indicates that you can , in fact , have black holes well below a million solar masses in size at the centers of galaxies.the researchers found that the greater the masses of the intermediate-mass black holes were , the larger the central bulges of stars usually were in the galaxies that hosted them . 
a similar relationship is also seen with supermassive black holes , loeb said . 
this suggests the same process that builds black holes also builds galaxies ; it starts with smaller galaxies and is seen in bigger galaxies , he said . 
[ no escape : dive into a black hole ( infographic ) ] loeb expected to see intermediate-mass black holes in the centers of many small galaxies . 
if you go back in time to the early universe , these were the most common galaxies , loeb said . 
galaxy formation is a hierarchical process ; galaxies start small , and grow in mass by mergers and by accreting more matter.future research can explore how supermassive black holes originated . 
one possibility is that intermediate-mass black holes grew from stellar-mass black holes that rapidly devoured gas around them in the early universe , and that mergers of intermediate-mass black holes helped create supermassive black holes , loeb said . 
gravitational-wave observatories could detect such mergers in the future , he added.however , there are other possible origins for both intermediate-mass and supermassive black holes that scientists need to explore , loeb said . 
for instance , intermediate-mass black holes could have originated from the collisions of stars in extremely dense star clusters . 
in addition , black holes 100,000 to 1 million solar masses in size could have formed from collapsing massive gas clouds in the early universe , he added.the more we can learn about the origins of intermediate-mass and supermassive black holes , the more we can understand about the evolution of galaxies and the universe , loeb said.chilingarian and his colleagues are now using one of the magellan telescopes in chile to improve their estimates of black-hole masses , and they hope to inspect 13 promising intermediate-mass black-hole candidates with the chandra x-ray observatory . 
chilingarian also noted that , if the erosita x-ray space telescope launches as planned in 2019 , the number of confirmed intermediate-mass black holes will grow by an order of magnitude.chilingarian and his colleagues detailed their findings online may 3 in a study submitted to the astrophysical journal.follow charles q. choi on twitter @ cqchoi . 
follow us @ spacedotcom , facebook and google+ . 
original article on space.com . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
charles q. choisocial links navigationcontributing writercharles q. choi is a contributing writer for space.com and live science . 
he covers all things human origins and astronomy as well as physics , animals and general science topics . 
charles has a master of arts degree from the university of missouri-columbia , school of journalism and a bachelor of arts degree from the university of south florida . 
charles has visited every continent on earth , drinking rancid yak butter tea in lhasa , snorkeling with sea lions in the galapagos and even climbing an iceberg in antarctica . 
visit him at http : //www.sciwriter.us . 
more from space.1us military shoots down small object over alaska2puffy helium planets could explain exoplanet size mystery3blue origin teams up with shaq to send kids postcards to space on new shepard4watch russian cargo ship arrive at space station early saturday5blue origin aims for mars in 2024 with twin nasa spacecraft . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
black hole photographed for 1st time | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
scientists photograph a black hole for the 1st time . 
by mike wall published 10 april 2019 . 
black holes have finally been dragged out of the shadows . 
the event horizon telescope , a planet-scale array of eight ground-based radio telescopes forged through international collaboration , captured this image of the supermassive black hole in the center of the galaxy m87 and its shadow . 
( image credit : eht collaboration ) . 
black holes have finally been dragged out of the shadows.for the first time ever , humanity has photographed one of these elusive cosmic beasts , shining light on an exotic space-time realm that had long been beyond our ken . 
we have seen what we thought was unseeable , sheperd doeleman , of harvard university and the harvard-smithsonian center for astrophysics , said today ( april 10 ) during a press conference at the national press club in washington , d.c.related : what exactly is a black hole event horizon ( and what happens there ) ? doeleman directs the event horizon telescope ( eht ) project , which captured the epic imagery . 
these four photos , which were unveiled today at press events around the world and in a series of published papers , outline the contours of the monster black hole lurking at the heart of the elliptical galaxy m87.the imagery is mind-blowing enough in its own right . 
but even more significant is the trail the new results will likely blaze , researchers said.theres really a new field to explore , peter galison , a professor of physics and the history of science at harvard , said in an eht talk last month at the south by southwest ( sxsw ) festival in austin , texas . 
and thats ultimately whats so exciting about this.galison , who co-founded harvards interdisciplinary black hole initiative ( bhi ) , compared the imagerys potential impact to that of the drawings made by english scientist robert hooke in the 1600s . 
these illustrations showed people what insects and plants look like through a microscope.it opened a world , galison said of hookes work . 
a telescope the size of earththe eht is a consortium of more than 200 scientists that has been in the works for about two decades . 
its a truly international endeavor ; funding over the years has come from the u.s. national science foundation and many other organizations in countries around the world.the project takes its name from a black holes famed point of no return — the boundary beyond which nothing , not even light , can escape the objects gravitational clutches.the event horizon is the ultimate prison wall , bhi founding director avi loeb , the chair of harvards astronomy department , told space.com . 
( loeb is not part of the eht team . ) 
once youre in , you can never get out.its therefore impossible to photograph the interior of a black hole , unless you somehow manage to get in there yourself . 
( you and your pictures couldnt make it back to the outside world , of course . ) 
so , the eht images the event horizon , mapping out the black holes dark silhouette . 
( the disk of fast-moving gas swirling around and into black holes emits lots of radiation , so such silhouettes stand out . ) 
were looking for the loss of photons , eht science council member dan marrone , an associate professor of astronomy at the university of arizona , told space.com.the project has been scrutinizing two black holes — the m87 behemoth , which harbors about 6.5 billion times the mass of earths sun , and our own milky way galaxys central black hole , known as sagittarius a * . 
this latter object , while still a supermassive black hole , is a runt compared to m87s beast , containing a mere 4.3 million solar masses.both of these objects are tough targets because of their immense distance from earth . 
sagittarius a * lies about 26,000 light-years from us , and m87s black hole is a whopping 53.5 million light-years away.from our perspective , sagittarius a * s event horizon is so small that its the equivalent of seeing an orange on the moon or being able to read the newspaper in los angeles while youre sitting in new york city , doeleman said during the sxsw event last month.no single telescope on earth can make that observation , so doeleman and the rest of the eht team had to get creative . 
the researchers have linked up radio telescopes in arizona , spain , mexico , antarctica and other places around the world , forming a virtual instrument the size of earth . 
related : images : black holes of the universeso much datathe eht team has used this megascope to study the two supermassive black holes for two weeklong stretches to date — once in april 2017 and again the following year . 
the new imagery comes from the first observing run.there are good reasons why its taken two years for the projects first result to come out . 
for one thing , each night of observing generated about 1 petabyte of data , resulting in such a haul that the team has to move its information from place to place the old-fashioned way.theres no way that we can transfer this data through the internet , eht project scientist dimitrios psaltis , an astronomy professor at the university of arizona , said at the sxsw event . 
so , what we actually do is , we take our hard drives and we fedex them from place to place . 
this is much faster than any cable that you can ever find.this slows and complicates analysis , of course . 
data from the eht scope near the south pole , for example , couldnt get off antarctica until december 2017 , when it was warm enough for planes to go in and out , marrone said.correlating and calibrating the data was also tricky , he added . 
and the team took great care with this work , given the momentous nature of the find.if youre going to come with a big claim of imaging a black hole , you have to have big evidence , very strong evidence , doeleman said at the sxsw event ( which served as an explainer of the eht effort but did not announce any results ) .and on our project , we often think that people like [ albert ] einstein , [ arthur ] eddington [ and karl ] schwarzschild are kind of looking over our shoulders , he added , referring to physicists who helped pioneer our understanding of black holes . 
and when you have luminaries kind of virtually checking your work , you really want to get it right.related : the strangest black holes in the universea simulated image by the university of arizona shows the turbulent plasma in the extreme environment around a supermassive black hole . 
( image credit : university of arizona ) what it all meansthe eht project has two main goals , psaltis said : to image an event horizon for the first time ever and to help determine if einsteins theory of general relativity needs any revisions.before einstein came along , gravity was generally regarded as a mysterious force at a distance . 
but general relativity describes it as the warping of space-time : massive objects such as planets , stars and black holes create a sort of sag in space-time , much as a bowling ball would if placed on a trampoline . 
nearby objects follow this curve and get funneled toward the central mass . 
general relativity has held up incredibly well over the century since its introduction , passing every test that scientists have thrown at it . 
but the ehts observations provide another trial , in an extreme realm where predictions may not match reality . 
thats because astronomers can calculate the expected size and shape of an event horizon using general relativity , psaltis explained . 
if the observed silhouette matches the theory-informed simulations , then einstein was 100 % right , psaltis said . 
if the answer is no , then we have to tweak his theory in order to make it work with experiments . 
this is how science goes.and we learned today that no tweaks are needed , at least at the moment : ehts m87 observations are consistent with general relativity , team members said . 
namely , the event horizon is nearly circular and is the right size for a black hole of that immense mass.i have to admit , i was a little stunned that it matched so closely the predictions that we had made , eht team member avery broderick , of the university of waterloo and the perimeter institute for theoretical physics in canada , said during todays news conference.such ground-truthing is vital to the scientific process , of course . 
indeed , providing better information to feed into theories and simulations will likely be one of the ehts biggest contributions , loeb said . 
doing physics is a dialog with nature , he said . 
we test our ideas by comparing them to experiments ; experimental data is crucial.the new results should also help scientists get a better handle on black holes , he and other researchers said . 
for example , eht imagery will likely shine significant light on how gas spirals down into a black holes maw . 
this accretion process , which can lead to the generation of powerful jets of radiation , is poorly understood , loeb said.in addition , the shape of an event horizon can reveal whether a black hole is spinning , said fiona harrison of the california institute of technology , the principal investigator of nasas black-hole-studying nuclear spectroscopic telescope array ( nustar ) mission.weve inferred the spin of black holes indirectly , harrison , whos not part of the eht team , told space.com . 
eht imagery provides a direct test , which is very exciting , she added.ehts data revealed the m87 black hole is spinning clockwise , team members said today . 
the project should also show how matter is distributed around a black hole , and eht observations could eventually teach astronomers a great deal about how supermassive black holes shape the evolution of their host galaxies over long time scales , harrison said.ehts results also mesh well with those of the laser interferometer gravitational-wave observatory ( ligo ) , which has detected the space-time ripples generated by mergers involving black holes just a few dozen times more massive than the sun.despite varying across a factor of billion in mass , known black holes are all consistent with a single description , broderick said today . 
black holes big and small are analogous in important ways . 
what we learn from one [ type ] necessarily applies to the other.and in case youre wondering about sagittarius a * : the eht team hopes to get imagery of that supermassive black hole soon , doeleman said today . 
the researchers looked at m87 first , and its a bit easier to resolve than sagittarius a * because its less variable over short timescales , he explained.a new perspective ? then theres the broader appeal of the newly released imagery — how it speaks to those of us who arent astrophysicists . 
the contributions in this arena could be significant , eht team members and outside scientists said . 
photos can change the way we think about ourselves and our place in the universe , marrone noted , citing the famous earthrise photo taken by apollo 8 astronaut bill anders in december 1968 . 
this image , which gave the masses a glimpse of our planet as it really is — a lonely outpost of life in an infinite sea of darkness — is widely credited with helping to spur the environmental movement.seeing a real-life black hole — or its silhouette , anyway — is the stuff of science fiction , harrison said . 
and weve seen just the projects first few photos , she added : theyre only going to get better . 
astronomers to peer into a black hole for 1st time with event horizon telescopethis huge black hole is spinning at half the speed of light ! 8 baffling astronomy mysteriesmike walls book about the search for alien life , out there . 
( grand central publishing , 2018 ; illustrated by karl tate ) , is out now . 
follow him on twitter @ michaeldwall . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom or facebook . . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
mike wallsocial links navigationsenior space writermichael wall is a senior space writer with space.com . 
and joined the team in 2010 . 
he primarily covers exoplanets , spaceflight and military space , but has been known to dabble in the space art beat . 
his book about the search for alien life , out there , was published on nov. 13 , 2018 . 
before becoming a science writer , michael worked as a herpetologist and wildlife biologist . 
he has a ph.d. in evolutionary biology from the university of sydney , australia , a bachelors degree from the university of arizona , and a graduate certificate in science writing from the university of california , santa cruz . 
to find out what his latest project is , you can follow michael on twitter . 
more from space.1james webb space telescope opens pandoras cluster in stunning image with help from einstein ( video ) 2supercharged valentines day auroras give alaska-based polar lights chaser the night of his life ( photos ) 3comet c/2022 a2 ( pan-starrs ) passes close by the sun this weekend4pakistan gets space-flown seeds from chinas shenzhou 14 mission ( video ) 5pictures from space ! 
our image of the day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
black holes | science mission directorate . 
skip to main content . 
nasa science mission directorate . 
share the science . 
ask a question . 
science topicsuniversesolar systemsunearthspace experimentsmissionsscience-enabling technologylunar discovery and explorationscience activationnewsscience @ nasapress releaseswatchsciencecastswe asked a nasa expertnasa science liveez sciencefor researchersoverviewfaqsolicitationssmd bridge programroses blognac science committeenasa postdoc programteampi resourcesscience datahelp & supportsuborbital programuaplearnersoverviewteamsresourcessme mapopportunitiesnewshighlightshotlinespace placeget involvednasa science at homeart and scienceupcoming eventsconnectemail sign upfollow usresourcestoolkitsvisual presentations citizen scienceprojectshighlightspublicationsnasa citizen scientistsabout usoverviewleadershippeopleresourcesscience strategyworkforce initiativescareersideaconnectcommunicationscontact usespañolscience in spanish . 
learn about this image . 
what we study . 
what we study . 
dark energy , dark matter . 
the big bang . 
dont let the name fool you : a black hole is anything but empty space . 
rather , it is a great amount of matter packed into a very small area - think of a star ten times more massive than the sun squeezed into a sphere approximately the diameter of new york city . 
the result is a gravitational field so strong that nothing , not even light , can escape . 
in recent years , nasa instruments have painted a new picture of these strange objects that are , to many , the most fascinating objects in space . 
intense x-ray flares thought to be caused by a black hole devouring a star . 
( video ) . 
watch the video . 
the idea of an object in space so massive and dense that light could not escape it has been around for centuries . 
most famously , black holes were predicted by einsteins theory of general relativity , which showed that when a massive star dies , it leaves behind a small , dense remnant core . 
if the cores mass is more than about three times the mass of the sun , the equations showed , the force of gravity overwhelms all other forces and produces a black hole . 
a video about black holes . 
watch the video . 
scientists cant directly observe black holes with telescopes that detect x-rays , light , or other forms of electromagnetic radiation . 
we can , however , infer the presence of black holes and study them by detecting their effect on other matter nearby . 
if a black hole passes through a cloud of interstellar matter , for example , it will draw matter inward in a process known as accretion . 
a similar process can occur if a normal star passes close to a black hole . 
in this case , the black hole can tear the star apart as it pulls it toward itself . 
as the attracted matter accelerates and heats up , it emits x-rays that radiate into space . 
recent discoveries offer some tantalizing evidence that black holes have a dramatic influence on the neighborhoods around them - emitting powerful gamma ray bursts , devouring nearby stars , and spurring the growth of new stars in some areas while stalling it in others . 
one stars end is a black holes beginning . 
most black holes form from the remnants of a large star that dies in a supernova explosion . 
( smaller stars become dense neutron stars , which are not massive enough to trap light . ) 
if the total mass of the star is large enough ( about three times the mass of the sun ) , it can be proven theoretically that no force can keep the star from collapsing under the influence of gravity . 
however , as the star collapses , a strange thing occurs . 
as the surface of the star nears an imaginary surface called the event horizon , time on the star slows relative to the time kept by observers far away . 
when the surface reaches the event horizon , time stands still , and the star can collapse no more - it is a frozen collapsing object . 
astronomers have identified a candidate for the smallest-known black hole . 
( video ) . 
watch the video . 
even bigger black holes can result from stellar collisions . 
soon after its launch in december 2004 , nasas swift telescope observed the powerful , fleeting flashes of light known as gamma ray bursts . 
chandra and nasas hubble space telescope later collected data from the events afterglow , and together the observations led astronomers to conclude that the powerful explosions can result when a black hole and a neutron star collide , producing another black hole . 
babies and giants . 
although the basic formation process is understood , one perennial mystery in the science of black holes is that they appear to exist on two radically different size scales . 
on the one end , there are the countless black holes that are the remnants of massive stars . 
peppered throughout the universe , these stellar mass black holes are generally 10 to 24 times as massive as the sun . 
astronomers spot them when another star draws near enough for some of the matter surrounding it to be snared by the black holes gravity , churning out x-rays in the process . 
most stellar black holes , however , are very difficult to detect . 
judging from the number of stars large enough to produce such black holes , however , scientists estimate that there are as many as ten million to a billion such black holes in the milky way alone . 
on the other end of the size spectrum are the giants known as supermassive black holes , which are millions , if not billions , of times as massive as the sun . 
astronomers believe that supermassive black holes lie at the center of virtually all large galaxies , even our own milky way . 
astronomers can detect them by watching for their effects on nearby stars and gas . 
this chart shows the relative masses of super-dense cosmic objects . 
read the full article . 
historically , astronomers have long believed that no mid-sized black holes exist . 
however , recent evidence from chandra , xmm-newton and hubble strengthens the case that mid-size black holes do exist . 
one possible mechanism for the formation of supermassive black holes involves a chain reaction of collisions of stars in compact star clusters that results in the buildup of extremely massive stars , which then collapse to form intermediate-mass black holes . 
the star clusters then sink to the center of the galaxy , where the intermediate-mass black holes merge to form a supermassive black hole . 
december 20 , 2022 . 
nasa gets unusual close glimpse of black hole snacking on star . 
november 23 , 2022 . 
ixpe helps solve black hole jet mystery . 
november 21 , 2022 . 
listen to the light echoes from a black hole . 
november 10 , 2022 . 
magnetic fields help black holes reach deeper into galaxies . 
november 3 , 2022 . 
ixpe reveals shape , orientation of hot matter around black hole . 
october 13 , 2022 . 
swift , fermi missions detect exceptional cosmic blast . 
august 18 , 2022 . 
nasa telescopes capture stellar delivery service for black hole ( ngc 4424 ) . 
june 30 , 2022 . 
chandra shows giant black hole spins slower than its peers ( h1821+243 ) . 
june 10 , 2022 . 
hubble determines mass of isolated black hole roaming our milky way galaxy . 
may 12 , 2022 . 
nasa telescopes support event horizon telescope in studying milky ways black hole ( sagittarius a * ) . 
may 5 , 2022 . 
swift tracks potential magnetic flip of monster black hole . 
may 4 , 2022 . 
new nasa black hole sonifications with a remix . 
april 20 , 2022 . 
black holes raze thousands of stars to fuel growth . 
april 13 , 2022 . 
hubble sheds light on origins of supermassive black holes . 
april 7 , 2022 . 
fermi hunts for gravitational waves from monster black holes . 
march 31 , 2022 . 
feasting black holes caught in galactic spiderweb ( spiderweb galaxy field ) . 
february 22 , 2022 . 
how magnetic fields help feed a supermassive black hole . 
january 19 , 2022 . 
hubble finds a black hole igniting star formation in a dwarf galaxy . 
january 10 , 2022 . 
mini monster black hole could hold clues to giants growth ( mrk 462 ) . 
december 16 , 2021 . 
astronomers spy quartet of cavities from giant black holes : rbs 797 . 
december 9 , 2021 . 
mini-jet found near milky ways supermassive black hole . 
november 10 , 2021 . 
black holes can tell us the expansion rate of the universe . 
september 16 , 2021 . 
jingle , pluck , and hum : sounds from space . 
august 5 , 2021 . 
huge rings around a black hole ( v404 cygni ) . 
what we study . 
dark energy , dark matterblack holesthe big banggalaxiesstarsexoplanets . 
organization and staff 2020 decadal survey2022 senior review of operating missionsastrophysics fleet mission chart ( pdf ) astronomy picture of the daynight sky networkspacecraft paper models . 
field guide to black holesblack holes : gravitys relentless pullblack hole fact sheet and morelisten to a black hole . 
volunteers help discover the reddest . 
february 07 , 2023 . 
the scigirls become disk detectives . 
february 02 , 2023 . 
nasa wants you to help study planets . 
january 11 , 2023 . 
become a dark energy explorer ! 
january 06 , 2023 . 
science newsscience at nasa . 
we asked a nasa expert . 
nac science committee . 
nasa postdoc program . 
help & support . 
get involvednasa science at home . 
art and science . 
email sign up . 
nasa citizen scientists . 
nasa official : dana bolles . 
last updated : february 13 , 2023 . 
ask a question . 
science topicsuniverseoverview2020 decadal surveyapd responses to decadalpre 2020 decadal reportslarge missionsprobe missionswhat we studydark energy , dark matterblack holesthe big banggalaxiesstarsexoplanetsprogramsphysics of the cosmoscosmic originsastrophysics explorersexoplanet explorationastrophysics researchastrophysics div technologyastrophysics pioneersmissionsscience questionshow does the universe work ? how did we get here ? are we alone ? astro dataheasarcmastnexscinedirsasimbadadsdocumentsastrophysics roadmapmeeting of expertssolar systemoverviewwhat we studyinner solar systemouter solar systemsmall bodies of the solar systemprogramsdiscoverylunar discovery & explorationmars explorationnew frontiersplanetary defense coordination officeouter planets & ocean worldssmall satssservimissionsscience questionshow did life begin and evolve on earth ? how did the solar system evolve ? how did the suns family originate ? what are the characteristics of the solar system ? documentsplanetary dataoverviewpde elementspde irbstatus updatesarchives/repositoriesopportunitiestraining toolkitsolar systemsunoverviewheliophysics leadershiphelio org chartsmd organization chartprogram officers listwhat we studyprogramsheliophysics researchballoonscubesatssolar terrestrial probesexplorersliving with a starsounding rocketsworking groupscitizen sciencetechnology programchimera : a hybrid search coil and fluxgate magnetometer for small spacecraft missionssolar cruiser : enabling new vistas for heliophysics sciencemissionsspace weatherspace weather strategyspace weather councilgap analysis reportsupplemental informationheliophysics 2024 decadal survey2050 workshopstrategic mission programshelio dataresourcesgeospace dynamics constellationdocuments and reportsmembershippublic commentsearthoverviewwhat we studyelementsflight programresearch and analysis programatmospheric compositionac missionsweatherwad missionsweather and atmospheric dynamics focus area publications and research highlightsour climateoceanographycvc missionsclimate variability & changeel niñoglobal water & energy cyclewec missionscarbon cycle & ecosystemscce missionscarbon cycle and ecosystems focus area publications and research highlightsour surfacea year in review : new earth discoveries in 2018accounting for internal variabilitychanges in global terrestrial water storage cclimate change changing ensoclimate change is speeding up the water cyclecold-intolerant plants are creeping farther northice losses from antarctica have tripled since 2012india overtakes china as top emitter of sulfur dioxidelinking ocean circulation and riverine carbon fluxlocal land subsidence increases flood risk in san francisco baysatellites detect undiscovered penguin populationssea surface salinity could provide new insight into severe stormsseeing the connection between neighboring volcanoes at depthwarm ocean waters off greenland put glaciers at more riska year in review : new earth discoveries in 2019a year in review : new earth discoveries in 2020esi missionsearth science research newsocean physics at nasaselected proposalsapplied sciences programcommon instrument interfacecii guidelines working meetingcii reference documentscii workshop 1cii workshop 2cii workshop 3essp program libraryestomissionsscience questionsearth dataevery day is earth dayresourcesglobal challengesapplications surveyeventsspace experimentsovervieworganizationstaff biosdecadal surveywhat we studyprogramsspace biologyanimal biologyanimal biology : what we studycell & molecular biology programdevelopmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programexperiments - animal biology programexperiments - cell & molecular biology programexperiments - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programexperiments - microbiology programexperiments - plant biology programhardware - animal biology programhardware - cell & molecular biology programhardware - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programhardware - microbiology programhardware - plant biology programmice behavior in space - animal biologymicrobiology programplant biology programpublications - animal biology programpublications - cell & molecular biology programpublications - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programpublications - microbiology programpublications - plant biology programspace biology science digestwhat we study - cell & molecular biology programwhat we study - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programwhat we study - microbiology programwhat we study - plant biology programphysical sciencesbiophysicscombustion sciencefluid physicsfundamental physicslife science flight projectsmaterials sciencestar 2020 participantsstar-2 ( 2021-2022 ) course participantsstar-3 ( 2022-2023 ) course participantssoft mattermissionsinvestigationsdatadocumentscommercialnews & mediawhat are the van allen belts and why do they matter ? missionsscience-enabling technologyoverviewsmd technology programstechnology highlightsoutput and resultsoverviewoverviewworkshop overviewforum agendagoogle docsspeaker presentations & videospeaker presentations & videossteering committeeorganizersspeakers and panelistsquestions & answerslunar discovery and explorationoverviewwhat we studyplanetary processesvolatile cyclesimpact history of earth/moonrecord of the ancient sunbiological systems on the moonphysical sciences on the moonplatform to the universeelementscommercial lunar payload serviceslunar instrument developmentsmallsats and cubesatslunar surface science mobility strategylunar reconnaissance orbiterapollo next generation sample analysisclps deliveriesto2-abto2-imto19cto19dto20a ( viper ) prime-1cp-11cp-12cs-3dataresourcesscience activationnewsscience @ nasapress releaseswatchsciencecastswe asked a nasa expertnasa science liveez sciencefor researchersoverviewnasa science social media consolidation faqfaqsolicitationssmd bridge programquestions and answers for smd bridge program workshop organizing committeeroses blognac science committeeoverviewmeetingsmembersscience advisory committeesastrophysics advisory committeeastrophysics analysis groupsearth science advisory committeeheliophysics advisory committeeplanetary science advisory committeeplanetary science analysis groupsbiological and physical sciences advisory committeeapplied sciences advisory committeesubcommitteesnasa postdoc programteamprogram officers listadvisory committeespi resources2021 virtual launchpad informationaccessibility statementaccessibility statementpi launchpad workshop contentpi launchpad workshop videospi launchpad : developing your first flight mission proposalpi launchpad : pre-application information sessionpi workshop sessionsquestions and answers about the pi launchpad 2021 virtual workshopquestions and answers about the pi launchpad 2023 in-person workshopresourcesscience mission directorate pi launchpad workshopscience datafaq for smd information policyopen-source science initiativeoverviewwhy do open science ? transform to open science ( tops ) smd ai initiativedata and computing architecture studyseries a workshopsseries c workshopsupcoming and past eventsopen-source science workshopoverviewagendacode of conductscience information policyhelp & supporthow to guidesvolunteer for review panelssuborbital programuaplearnersoverviewastrobiology standards alignmentsastrophysics standards alignmentsback to schoolearth science standards alignmentsheliophysics standards alignmentsplanetary science standards alignmentsthank you , teachers ! teamsexplore science activationscience activation teamsresourcessme mapnationwide eclipse ballooning project ( nebp ) ocean community engagement and awareness using nasa earth observations and science for hispanic/latino studentsopportunitiesnewshighlightshotlinespace placeget involvednasa science at homeart and scienceupcoming eventsconnectemail sign upfollow usresourcestoolkitsdiy - paper spacecraft modelsmission posters : solar systemnew horizons flybyvisual presentations earth day 2022citizen scienceprojectshighlightspublicationsnasa citizen scientistsabout usoverviewscience mission directorateleadershippeopleresourcesscience strategyscience strategydecadal surveysyear in review20152014201320122011201020082007200620052004workforce initiativesbest practices for establishing part-time/time-limited supervisory opportunitiesnew hires orientation workshoprotational program for scientistsscience career opportunities planning and exploration workshopscience career opportunities planning and exploration workshopcareersideaconnectcommunicationscontact usespañolscience in spanish . 
hunt is on for gravity waves in space-time | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
hunt is on for gravity waves in space-time . 
by clara moskowitz published 15 august 2012 . 
artists impression of gravitational waves from two orbiting black holes . 
( image credit : k. thorne ( caltech ) and t. carnahan ( nasa gsfc ) ) . 
because black holes are impossible to see , one of scientists best hopes to study them is to look for the ripples in space-time , called gravitational waves , that they are thought to create.gravitational waves would be distortions propagating through space and time caused by violent events such as the collision of two black holes . 
they were first predicted by einsteins general theory of relativity ; however , scientists have yet to find one.that could change when the latest version of a gravitational wave-hunting facility gets up and running . 
the laser interferometer gravitational wave observatory ( ligo ) is actually a pair of observatories , in louisiana and washington state , that began operating in 2002 . 
newly sensitized detectors are being added to both.the advanced ligo detectors that are now being installed will see out through a substantial part of the universe , said california institute of technology emeritus professor of physics kip thorne , a leading proponent of ligo . 
we expect to see black holes colliding at a rate of perhaps somewhere between once an hour and once a year . 
[ bizarre black holes explained : q & a with physicist kip thorne ] each ligo facility involves two perpendicular arms in a giant l-shape , stretching out about 2.5 miles ( 4 kilometers ) each . 
each arm contains a mirror at either end , with a beam of laser light continuously bouncing back and forth.if a gravitational wave were to pass through earth , it would create a minute distortion in space-time , changing the distance between the two mirrors in one or both directions , depending on how the wave was oriented . 
scientists would measure this as a small difference in the time it takes the laser beams to travel the length of one arm compared with another.thorne predicted ligos first discovery will come between 2014 and 2017.it depends on how kind nature is and how rapid the commissioning , or the debugging , of the detectors is , thorne told space.com . 
these are very , very complex instruments . 
it requires a lot of careful work by superb experimenters to bring them up to their design sensitivity.if ligo does succeed in finding gravitational waves , the ramifications could be far-reaching . 
not only would such a discovery confirm that these traveling warps exist in space-time , it would provide precious information about the nature of the black holes or other objects that created them.by studying the shape of the gravitational waves – their waveforms – scientists could extract information about the objects that formed them . 
a gravitational wave produced by a collision of two black holes , for example , would have a particular waveform , according to theoretical simulations.we will be able , for each black hole pair , to say what the masses of those black holes were , what their spins were , what the orbit was like , as well as where these objects are in the universe — where they are in the sky and how far away they are , thorne said . 
so theres a great deal of information in those waveforms both about relativitys predictions of warped space-time and about whats going on in the universe with black holes.follow clara moskowitz on twitter @ claramoskowitz or space.com @ spacedotcom . 
were also on facebook & google+ . . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
clara moskowitzsocial links navigationassistant managing editorclara moskowitz is a science and space writer who joined the space.com team in 2008 and served as assistant managing editor from 2011 to 2013 . 
clara has a bachelors degree in astronomy and physics from wesleyan university , and a graduate certificate in science writing from the university of california , santa cruz . 
she covers everything from astronomy to human spaceflight and once aced a nastar suborbital spaceflight training program for space missions . 
clara is currently associate editor of scientific american . 
to see her latest project is , follow clara on twitter . 
more from space.1elegoo neptune 3 plus review : the total package2new satellite photos show surface cracks from devastating turkey earthquake3task complete ! 
perseverance mars rover snaps photo of filled sample depot4lego star wars at-te walker review . 
5mini astrobiology laser could join hunt for life on mars and beyond . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
germany switches off black hole telescope on russian satellite , halts space cooperation | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
germany switches off black hole telescope on russian satellite , halts space cooperation . 
by tereza pultarova published 3 march 2022 . 
germany stopped all science cooperation with russia over its ukraine invasion , but space station work continues . 
the german erosita black hole telescope aboard the russia-built spetr-rg satellite was switched off as germany halted science cooperation with russia . 
( image credit : german aerospace center ) . 
a german-built space telescope making the largest ever map of black holes in the universe has been switched off after germany halted all science cooperation with russia to protest that countrys invasion of ukraine . 
the black hole-hunting telescope , called erosita , launched in 2019 from the baikonur cosmodrome in kazakhstan aboard the russian-built spectrum-roentgen-gamma satellite . 
the mission was jointly funded by the german aerospace center ( dlr ) and russias space agency roscosmos . 
on wednesday , a spokesperson for germanys max planck institute for extraterrestrial physics , which built and operates erosita , told space.com in an email that the telescope was placed into safe mode during ground contact on saturday , february 26.the move comes after germanys federal ministry of education and research announced on friday . 
( feb. 25 ) that all existing , long-standing cooperation in science and research with russia would be immediately halted . 
related : ukraines proud space industry faces obliteration , but its former space chief hopes for the futuredlr issued its own statement . 
on thursday ( march 3 ) , confirming that it would pause all partnerships with russia . 
in light of the aggression against ukraine , the dlr executive board decided to stop cooperation on ongoing and planned projects , the dlr said in the statement . 
no new projects and initiatives with russian research institutions will take place.germany previously worked with russia on the bion m . 
mission , which sent 45 mice and several lizard , fish and snail species on a month-long space trip in 2013 . 
the two countries have also collaborated on development of robotic technologies . 
for space exploration . 
most significant , perhaps , is the fact that germany is the largest contributor to the budget of the european space agency ( esa ) , which is part of the international space station partnership that includes russia , japan and the u.s . 
currently , german esa astronaut matthias maurer is on board of the orbital outpost together with russian cosmonauts pyotr dubrov and anton shkaplerov . 
nasa astronauts kayla barron , mark vande hei , raja chari and thomas mashburn are also on the space station.the iss partnership has for years been considered above politics but with the quickly escalating russian aggression against ukraine , questions have been raised about its future . 
russia previously said it did not plan to cooperate with western countries in future space exploration endeavors beyond the iss . 
for now , the iss cooperation continues unchanged . 
frances space agency cnes said in a statement . 
issued on wednesday ( march 2 ) that the iss collaboration under esa continues with the involvement of all the partners of the station.the same applies for several cnes/roscosmos research partnerships aboard the space station focused on space medicine , cnes said in the same statement.cnes , which operates europes spaceport in kourou , french guiana , is currently looking at possibilities to replace the russia-supplied soyuz rocket in several planned european governmental missions with europes own vega or ariane 5 . 
that includes the launch of two navigation satellites of the european constellation galileo ( an equivalent to the u.s. gps ) , which was planned for later this year . 
european launch provider arianespace had been using soyuz since 2011 to complement the light vega and heavy-lift ariane 5 launchers . 
cness announcement followed on russias decisions earlier this week to halt soyuz launches from french guiana immediately , in light of what russia perceived as western aggression.related stories : — europes mars rover will likely miss 2022 launch on russian rocket due to ukraine invasion sanctions . 
— russian space program chief says us sanctions could destroy international space station partnership— soviet-era space shuttle carrier aircraft destroyed in russian attack on ukrainein late 2021 , germany arrested a russian researcher working at a university in bavaria for leaking information on europes ariane launcher program to russian intelligence , according to reuters . 
germany had previously been criticized for its permissive attitude to russia following the 2014 military annexation of the former ukrainian territory of crimea , reuters reported . 
follow tereza pultarova on twitter @ terezapultarova . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
tereza pultarovasocial links navigationsenior writertereza is a london-based science and technology journalist , aspiring fiction writer and amateur gymnast . 
originally from prague , the czech republic , she spent the first seven years of her career working as a reporter , script-writer and presenter for various tv programmes of the czech public service television . 
she later took a career break to pursue further education and added a masters in science from the international space university , france , to her bachelors in journalism and masters in cultural anthropology from pragues charles university . 
she worked as a reporter at the engineering and technology magazine , freelanced for a range of publications including live science , space.com , professional engineering , via satellite and space news and served as a maternity cover science editor at the european space agency . 
more from space.1south koreas danuri probe captures phases of earth from lunar orbit ( photo ) 2hubble spies strange spokes on saturns rings after 14-year hiatus ( video ) 3europes juice jupiter spacecraft arrives at spaceport ahead of april launch4sun storm may supercharge auroras for valentines day5what is the u.s. space force and what does it do ? . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
heres how scientists turned the world into a telescope ( to see a black hole ) | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
heres how scientists turned the world into a telescope ( to see a black hole ) . 
by meghan bartels published 17 april 2019 . 
unsurprisingly , its complicated . 
( image credit : eso/b . 
tafreshi ( twanight.org ) /cc by 3.0 ) ) . 
it took eight telescopes across the planet a week of observations to produce the black hole image that stunned the world last week , but it took scientists much longer to teach those instruments to work together.and in the two years since the data behind that image was gathered , the event horizon telescope partnership behind the groundbreaking observations has already expanded , with more telescopes looking to join the fray soon . 
each new instrument will sharpen scientists images of their quarry , but each will also need to be outfitted carefully before it can join the collaboration.fortunately , the hardest work is already done , dan marrone , an astronomer at the university of arizona and a member of the event horizon telescope science team , told space.com . 
for the most part , the sites were adding now are just reimplementing the basic hardware that we know how to do well , he said.related : eureka ! 
scientists photograph a black hole for the 1st timebut the more telescopes the team can bring on board , the sharper the final image is . 
the challenge in doing this comes from the fact that none of these telescopes were custom-built for the event horizon telescope project . 
theyre just instruments that happen to be what scientists call submillimeter telescopes , which can sense the wavelength range the event horizon team members needed to tune to for their black hole hunt.for the south pole telescope , then , the team needed to adapt a telescope designed to study the remnants of the big bang , installing a special detector and an optics package . 
all of which , of course , needed to withstand the extreme cold of antarctica.the event horizon telescope , a planet-scale array of eight ground-based radio telescopes forged through international collaboration , captured this image of the supermassive black hole in the center of the galaxy m87 and its shadow . 
( image credit : eht collaboration ) and the instruments involved in the observations included both single-dish telescopes and multidish arrays . 
that posed a particular challenge at the atacama large millimeter/submillimeter array ( alma ) high in the chilean desert , where information from the different dishes needed to be compiled perfectly.then , each of the instruments needed to be armed with an atomic clock so precise that it loses just 1 second every 100 million years . 
the clocks time must be imprinted on all the telescopes observations so that when scientists combine data gathered by different telescopes , the observations arent blurred.the other crucial equipment the team needed to install at each instrument was a system that could keep up with the massive stream of data being produced — 16 gigabits every second of the observation period , significantly more than other astronomy projects , marrone said . 
that required recording systems custom-built from commercial components.the event horizon telescope team has already outfitted one newcomer this way : the greenland telescope , which came online for the programs 2018 observation campaign . 
the addition posed its own challenges : the telescope was originally built as a prototype for the dishes of alma , then outfitted to withstand the cold , shipped up to greenland and set up as part of the event horizon telescope.that addition improved the teams observations of the northern part of m87 , stretching the arrays coverage northward . 
another upcoming addition , of the kitt peak telescope in arizona , will strengthen the array in the opposite way , partnering with the nearby submillimeter telescope to offer scientists some redundancy , helping the team calibrate the observations . 
if we could choose our array , we would have two telescopes at every site , marrone said.while there are plenty of schemas for how to arrange a collection of networked instruments , the team isnt really all that picky — more telescopes will always help their resolution , no matter where they are . 
the earths terrain does a good job of randomizing where we can put them , marrone said . 
but theres no reason the event horizon telescope will always need to be earth-bound . 
currently , there are no submillimeter telescopes in orbit , but some team members are looking into proposing just such an instrument . 
you dont need that much of a telescope , marrone said . 
its not quite cubesat scale , but it aint jwst , he added , referencing the massive , over-budget and behind-schedule james webb space telescope currently scheduled to launch in 2021.and perhaps a space-based contributor would address some of the mundane challenges that haunt marrone and his colleagues during their quest to see what cant be seen . 
thats because the process requires gathering data , multiplying it thousands of times , and then clarifying a perfect sine wave , rhythmic and symmetrical , from it . 
the number of days ive spent just trying to figure out what was making my sine wave wiggle , it can be really painful , marrone said . 
the culprits can range from someone stepping on a cable or jumping near an atomic clock , to the wind blowing too strongly or two pieces of metal touching each other when they shouldnt.doing this is a really weird job , marrone said . 
its all these stupid little issues that we always have to sort out to get this to work . 
but when it works , its worth it.the future of black hole photography : whats next for the event horizon telescopethe event horizon telescope is trying to take the first-ever photo of a black holemeet alma : amazing photos from giant radio telescopeemail meghan bartels at mbartels @ space.com or follow her @ meghanbartels . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
meghan bartelssocial links navigationsenior writermeghan is a senior writer at space.com and has more than five years experience as a science journalist based in new york city . 
she joined space.com in july 2018 , with previous writing published in outlets including newsweek and audubon . 
meghan earned an ma in science journalism from new york university and a ba in classics from georgetown university , and in her free time she enjoys reading and visiting museums . 
follow her on twitter at @ meghanbartels . 
more from space.1the polaris program : one big step for civilian spaceflight2earth-size exoplanet spotted just 72 light-years away3super bowl trailer offers another peek at guardians of the galaxy vol . 
34sony a6600 camera review5pictures from space ! 
our image of the day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
black hole - wikipedia . 
jump to content . 
create accountlog in . 
.pages for logged out editors learn more . 
main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate . 
helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file . 
what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item . 
download as pdfprintable version . 
in other projects . 
on this wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title . 
go to top . 
move to sidebar . 
( top ) . 
2properties and structure . 
2.6innermost stable circular orbit ( isco ) . 
3formation and evolution . 
3.1.1primordial black holes and the big bang . 
4.1detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes . 
4.2proper motions of stars orbiting sagittarius a * . 
4.3accretion of matter . 
6.1entropy and thermodynamics . 
6.2information loss paradox . 
10.2university textbooks and monographs . 
.toggle the table of contents . 
afrikaansalemannischالعربيةaragonésարեւմտահայերէնঅসমীয়াasturianuavañeẽazərbaycancaتۆرکجهবাংলাbanjarbân-lâm-gúбашҡортсабеларускаябеларуская ( тарашкевіца ) भोजपुरीbikol centralбългарскиboarischབོད་ཡིགbosanskibrezhonegбуряадcatalàчӑвашлаčeštinacorsucymraegdanskالدارجةdeutscheestiελληνικάemiliàn e rumagnòlespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfiji hindiføroysktfrançaisfryskgaeilgegaelggàidhliggalegoગુજરાતી𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺한국어hausaհայերենहिन्दीhornjoserbscehrvatskiidoilokanobahasa indonesiainterlinguaiñupiatunisizuluíslenskaitalianoעבריתjawaಕನ್ನಡкъарачай-малкъарქართულიkaszëbscziқазақшаkernowekkiswahilikreyòl ayisyenkriyòl gwiyannenkurdîкыргызчаladinlatinalatviešulëtzebuergeschлезгиlietuviųlimburgslingua franca novalivvinkarjalalombardmagyarмакедонскиmalagasyമലയാളംmaltiमराठीმარგალურიمصرىဘာသာ မန်bahasa melayuminangkabauмонголမြန်မာဘာသာnederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語нохчийнnordfriisknorsk bokmålnorsk nynorsknovialoccitanଓଡ଼ିଆoʻzbekcha / ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀpälzischپنجابیپښتوpicardpiemontèispolskiportuguêsromânăruna simiрусиньскыйрусскийсаха тылаscotsshqipsicilianuසිංහලsimple englishسنڌيslovenčinaslovenščinaślůnskiکوردیсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsundasuomisvenskatagalogதமிழ்татарча / tatarçaతెలుగుไทยтоҷикӣtürkçetürkmençeудмуртукраїнськаاردوvahcuenghvènetovepsän kel ’ tiếng việtwalon文言winaray吴语ייִדיש粵語žemaitėška中文 . 
readview sourceview history . 
readview sourceview history . 
from wikipedia , the free encyclopedia . 
astronomical object that has a no-return boundary . 
for other uses , see black hole ( disambiguation ) . 
direct image of a supermassive black hole at the core of messier 87 [ 1 ] . 
animated simulation of a schwarzschild black hole with a galaxy passing behind . 
around the time of alignment , extreme gravitational lensing of the galaxy is observed . 
a black hole is a region of spacetime where gravity is so strong that nothing , including light or other electromagnetic waves , has enough energy to escape its event horizon . 
[ 2 ] the theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass can deform spacetime to form a black hole . 
[ 3 ] [ 4 ] the boundary of no escape is called the event horizon . 
although it has a great effect on the fate and circumstances of an object crossing it , it has no locally detectable features according to general relativity . 
[ 5 ] in many ways , a black hole acts like an ideal black body , as it reflects no light . 
[ 6 ] [ 7 ] moreover , quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit hawking radiation , with the same spectrum as a black body of a temperature inversely proportional to its mass . 
this temperature is of the order of billionths of a kelvin for stellar black holes , making it essentially impossible to observe directly . 
objects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by john michell and pierre-simon laplace . 
[ 8 ] in 1916 , karl schwarzschild found the first modern solution of general relativity that would characterize a black hole . 
david finkelstein , in 1958 , first published the interpretation of black hole as a region of space from which nothing can escape . 
black holes were long considered a mathematical curiosity ; it was not until the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a generic prediction of general relativity . 
the discovery of neutron stars by jocelyn bell burnell in 1967 sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality . 
the first black hole known was cygnus x-1 , identified by several researchers independently in 1971 . [ 9 ] [ 10 ] . 
black holes of stellar mass form when massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle . 
after a black hole has formed , it can grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings . 
supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses ( m☉ ) may form by absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes . 
there is consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centres of most galaxies . 
the presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as visible light . 
any matter that falls onto a black hole can form an external accretion disk heated by friction , forming quasars , some of the brightest objects in the universe . 
stars passing too close to a supermassive black hole can be shredded into streamers that shine very brightly before being swallowed . 
[ 11 ] if other stars are orbiting a black hole , their orbits can determine the black holes mass and location . 
such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives such as neutron stars . 
in this way , astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems and established that the radio source known as sagittarius a * , at the core of the milky way galaxy , contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3 million solar masses . 
on 11 february 2016 , the ligo scientific collaboration and the virgo collaboration announced the first direct detection of gravitational waves , representing the first observation of a black hole merger . 
[ 12 ] on 10 april 2019 , the first direct image of a black hole and its vicinity was published , following observations made by the event horizon telescope ( eht ) in 2017 of the supermassive black hole in messier 87s galactic centre . 
[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] as of 2021 [ update ] , the nearest known body thought to be a black hole is around 1,500 light-years ( 460 parsecs ) away ( see list of nearest black holes ) . 
though only a couple dozen black holes have been found so far in the milky way , there are thought to be hundreds of millions , most of which are solitary and do not cause emission of radiation . 
[ 16 ] therefore , they would only be detectable by gravitational lensing . 
simulated view of a black hole in front of the large magellanic cloud . 
note the gravitational lensing effect , which produces two enlarged but highly distorted views of the cloud . 
across the top , the milky way disk appears distorted into an arc . 
published in 2019 . [ 17 ] . 
the idea of a body so big that even light could not escape was briefly proposed by english astronomical pioneer and clergyman john michell in a letter published in november 1784 . 
michells simplistic calculations assumed such a body might have the same density as the sun , and concluded that one would form when a stars diameter exceeds the suns by a factor of 500 , and its surface escape velocity exceeds the usual speed of light . 
michell referred to these bodies as dark stars . 
[ 18 ] he correctly noted that such supermassive but non-radiating bodies might be detectable through their gravitational effects on nearby visible bodies . 
[ 8 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] scholars of the time were initially excited by the proposal that giant but invisible dark stars might be hiding in plain view , but enthusiasm dampened when the wavelike nature of light became apparent in the early nineteenth century , [ 21 ] as if light were a wave rather than a particle , it was unclear what , if any , influence gravity would have on escaping light waves . [ 8 ] [ 20 ] . 
modern physics discredits michells notion of a light ray shooting directly from the surface of a supermassive star , being slowed down by the stars gravity , stopping , and then free-falling back to the stars surface . [ 22 ] . 
see also : history of general relativity . 
{ \displaystyle g_ { \mu \nu } +\lambda g_ { \mu \nu } = { \kappa } t_ { \mu \nu } } . 
einstein field equations . 
schwarzschild ( interior ) . 
van stockum dust . 
in 1915 , albert einstein developed his theory of general relativity , having earlier shown that gravity does influence lights motion . 
only a few months later , karl schwarzschild found a solution to the einstein field equations that describes the gravitational field of a point mass and a spherical mass . 
[ 23 ] [ 24 ] a few months after schwarzschild , johannes droste , a student of hendrik lorentz , independently gave the same solution for the point mass and wrote more extensively about its properties . 
[ 25 ] [ 26 ] this solution had a peculiar behaviour at what is now called the schwarzschild radius , where it became singular , meaning that some of the terms in the einstein equations became infinite . 
the nature of this surface was not quite understood at the time . 
in 1924 , arthur eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates ( see eddington–finkelstein coordinates ) , although it took until 1933 for georges lemaître to realize that this meant the singularity at the schwarzschild radius was a non-physical coordinate singularity . 
[ 27 ] arthur eddington did however comment on the possibility of a star with mass compressed to the schwarzschild radius in a 1926 book , noting that einsteins theory allows us to rule out overly large densities for visible stars like betelgeuse because a star of 250 million km radius could not possibly have so high a density as the sun . 
firstly , the force of gravitation would be so great that light would be unable to escape from it , the rays falling back to the star like a stone to the earth . 
secondly , the red shift of the spectral lines would be so great that the spectrum would be shifted out of existence . 
thirdly , the mass would produce so much curvature of the spacetime metric that space would close up around the star , leaving us outside ( i.e. , nowhere ) . [ 28 ] [ 29 ] . 
in 1931 , subrahmanyan chandrasekhar calculated , using special relativity , that a non-rotating body of electron-degenerate matter above a certain limiting mass ( now called the chandrasekhar limit at 1.4 m☉ ) has no stable solutions . 
[ 30 ] his arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like eddington and lev landau , who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse . 
[ 31 ] they were partly correct : a white dwarf slightly more massive than the chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star , [ 32 ] which is itself stable . 
but in 1939 , robert oppenheimer and others predicted that neutron stars above another limit ( the tolman–oppenheimer–volkoff limit ) would collapse further for the reasons presented by chandrasekhar , and concluded that no law of physics was likely to intervene and stop at least some stars from collapsing to black holes . 
[ 33 ] their original calculations , based on the pauli exclusion principle , gave it as 0.7 m☉ ; subsequent consideration of neutron-neutron repulsion mediated by the strong force raised the estimate to approximately 1.5 m☉ to 3.0 m☉ . 
[ 34 ] observations of the neutron star merger gw170817 , which is thought to have generated a black hole shortly afterward , have refined the tov limit estimate to ~2.17 m☉ . [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] . 
oppenheimer and his co-authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped . 
this is a valid point of view for external observers , but not for infalling observers . 
because of this property , the collapsed stars were called frozen stars , because an outside observer would see the surface of the star frozen in time at the instant where its collapse takes it to the schwarzschild radius . [ 40 ] . 
in 1958 , david finkelstein identified the schwarzschild surface as an event horizon , a perfect unidirectional membrane : causal influences can cross it in only one direction . 
[ 41 ] this did not strictly contradict oppenheimers results , but extended them to include the point of view of infalling observers . 
finkelsteins solution extended the schwarzschild solution for the future of observers falling into a black hole . 
a complete extension had already been found by martin kruskal , who was urged to publish it . [ 42 ] . 
these results came at the beginning of the golden age of general relativity , which was marked by general relativity and black holes becoming mainstream subjects of research . 
this process was helped by the discovery of pulsars by jocelyn bell burnell in 1967 , [ 43 ] [ 44 ] which , by 1969 , were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars . 
[ 45 ] until that time , neutron stars , like black holes , were regarded as just theoretical curiosities ; but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse . 
[ citation needed ] . 
in this period more general black hole solutions were found . 
in 1963 , roy kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole . 
two years later , ezra newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged . 
[ 46 ] through the work of werner israel , [ 47 ] brandon carter , [ 48 ] [ 49 ] and david robinson [ 50 ] the no-hair theorem emerged , stating that a stationary black hole solution is completely described by the three parameters of the kerr–newman metric : mass , angular momentum , and electric charge . [ 51 ] . 
at first , it was suspected that the strange features of the black hole solutions were pathological artifacts from the symmetry conditions imposed , and that the singularities would not appear in generic situations . 
this view was held in particular by vladimir belinsky , isaak khalatnikov , and evgeny lifshitz , who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions . 
however , in the late 1960s roger penrose [ 52 ] and stephen hawking used global techniques to prove that singularities appear generically . 
[ 53 ] for this work , penrose received half of the 2020 nobel prize in physics , hawking having died in 2018 . 
[ 54 ] based on observations in greenwich and toronto in the early 1970s , cygnus x-1 , a galactic x-ray source discovered in 1964 , became the first astronomical object commonly accepted to be a black hole . [ 55 ] [ 56 ] . 
work by james bardeen , jacob bekenstein , carter , and hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics . 
[ 57 ] these laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy , area to entropy , and surface gravity to temperature . 
the analogy was completed when hawking , in 1974 , showed that quantum field theory implies that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole , predicting the effect now known as hawking radiation . [ 58 ] . 
john michell used the term dark star in a november 1783 letter to henry cavendish , [ 59 ] and in the early 20th century , physicists used the term gravitationally collapsed object . 
science writer marcia bartusiak traces the term black hole to physicist robert h. dicke , who in the early 1960s reportedly compared the phenomenon to the black hole of calcutta , notorious as a prison where people entered but never left alive . [ 60 ] . 
the term black hole was used in print by life and science news magazines in 1963 , [ 60 ] and by science journalist ann ewing in her article black holes in space , dated 18 january 1964 , which was a report on a meeting of the american association for the advancement of science held in cleveland , ohio . [ 61 ] [ 62 ] . 
in december 1967 , a student reportedly suggested the phrase black hole at a lecture by john wheeler ; [ 61 ] wheeler adopted the term for its brevity and advertising value , and it quickly caught on , [ 63 ] leading some to credit wheeler with coining the phrase . [ 64 ] . 
properties and structure . 
simple illustration of a non-spinning black holeartistic depiction of a black hole and its features . 
the no-hair theorem postulates that , once it achieves a stable condition after formation , a black hole has only three independent physical properties : mass , electric charge , and angular momentum ; the black hole is otherwise featureless . 
if the conjecture is true , any two black holes that share the same values for these properties , or parameters , are indistinguishable from one another . 
the degree to which the conjecture is true for real black holes under the laws of modern physics is currently an unsolved problem . [ 51 ] . 
these properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole . 
for example , a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object . 
similarly , the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of gausss law ( through the adm mass ) , far away from the black hole . 
[ 65 ] likewise , the angular momentum ( or spin ) can be measured from far away using frame dragging by the gravitomagnetic field , through for example the lense–thirring effect . [ 66 ] . 
when an object falls into a black hole , any information about the shape of the object or distribution of charge on it is evenly distributed along the horizon of the black hole , and is lost to outside observers . 
the behavior of the horizon in this situation is a dissipative system that is closely analogous to that of a conductive stretchy membrane with friction and electrical resistance—the membrane paradigm . 
[ 67 ] this is different from other field theories such as electromagnetism , which do not have any friction or resistivity at the microscopic level , because they are time-reversible . 
because a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters , there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions : the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in . 
the information that is lost includes every quantity that can not be measured far away from the black hole horizon , including approximately conserved quantum numbers such as the total baryon number and lepton number . 
this behavior is so puzzling that it has been called the black hole information loss paradox . [ 68 ] [ 69 ] . 
gravitational time dilation around a black hole . 
the simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum . 
these black holes are often referred to as schwarzschild black holes after karl schwarzschild who discovered this solution in 1916 . 
[ 24 ] according to birkhoffs theorem , it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric . 
[ 70 ] this means there is no observable difference at a distance between the gravitational field of such a black hole and that of any other spherical object of the same mass . 
the popular notion of a black hole sucking in everything in its surroundings is therefore correct only near a black holes horizon ; far away , the external gravitational field is identical to that of any other body of the same mass . [ 71 ] . 
solutions describing more general black holes also exist . 
non-rotating charged black holes are described by the reissner–nordström metric , while the kerr metric describes a non-charged rotating black hole . 
the most general stationary black hole solution known is the kerr–newman metric , which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum . [ 72 ] . 
while the mass of a black hole can take any positive value , the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass . 
the total electric charge q and the total angular momentum j are expected to satisfy the inequality . 
{ \displaystyle { \frac { q^ { 2 } } { 4\pi \epsilon _ { 0 } } } + { \frac { c^ { 2 } j^ { 2 } } { gm^ { 2 } } } \leq gm^ { 2 } } . 
for a black hole of mass m. black holes with the minimum possible mass satisfying this inequality are called extremal . 
solutions of einsteins equations that violate this inequality exist , but they do not possess an event horizon . 
these solutions have so-called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside , and hence are deemed unphysical . 
the cosmic censorship hypothesis rules out the formation of such singularities , when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter . 
[ 3 ] this is supported by numerical simulations . [ 73 ] . 
due to the relatively large strength of the electromagnetic force , black holes forming from the collapse of stars are expected to retain the nearly neutral charge of the star . 
rotation , however , is expected to be a universal feature of compact astrophysical objects . 
the black-hole candidate binary x-ray source grs 1915+105 [ 74 ] appears to have an angular momentum near the maximum allowed value . 
that uncharged limit is [ 75 ] . 
{ \displaystyle j\leq { \frac { gm^ { 2 } } { c } } , } . 
allowing definition of a dimensionless spin parameter such that [ 75 ] . 
{ \displaystyle 0\leq { \frac { cj } { gm^ { 2 } } } \leq 1 . } . 
[ 75 ] [ note 1 ] . 
black hole classifications . 
supermassive black hole . 
intermediate-mass black hole . 
103 km ≈ rearth . 
stellar black hole . 
micro black hole . 
up to mmoon . 
up to 0.1 mm . 
black holes are commonly classified according to their mass , independent of angular momentum , j . 
the size of a black hole , as determined by the radius of the event horizon , or schwarzschild radius , is proportional to the mass , m , through . 
k. m. , . 
{ \displaystyle r_ { \mathrm { s } } = { \frac { 2gm } { c^ { 2 } } } \approx 2.95\ , { \frac { m } { m_ { \odot } } } ~\mathrm { km , } } . 
where rs is the schwarzschild radius and m☉ is the mass of the sun . 
[ 77 ] for a black hole with nonzero spin and/or electric charge , the radius is smaller , [ note 2 ] until an extremal black hole could have an event horizon close to [ 78 ] . 
{ \displaystyle r_ { \mathrm { + } } = { \frac { gm } { c^ { 2 } } } . } . 
main article : event horizon . 
far away from the black hole , a particle can move in any direction , as illustrated by the set of arrows . 
it is restricted only by the speed of light.closer to the black hole , spacetime starts to deform . 
there are more paths going towards the black hole than paths moving away . 
[ note 3 ] inside of the event horizon , all paths bring the particle closer to the centre of the black hole . 
it is no longer possible for the particle to escape . 
the defining feature of a black hole is the appearance of an event horizon—a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can pass only inward towards the mass of the black hole . 
nothing , not even light , can escape from inside the event horizon . 
[ 80 ] [ 81 ] the event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary , information from that event can not reach an outside observer , making it impossible to determine whether such an event occurred . [ 82 ] . 
as predicted by general relativity , the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass . 
[ 83 ] at the event horizon of a black hole , this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole . [ 84 ] . 
to a distant observer , clocks near a black hole would appear to tick more slowly than those farther away from the black hole . 
[ 85 ] due to this effect , known as gravitational time dilation , an object falling into a black hole appears to slow as it approaches the event horizon , taking an infinite time to reach it . 
[ 86 ] at the same time , all processes on this object slow down , from the viewpoint of a fixed outside observer , causing any light emitted by the object to appear redder and dimmer , an effect known as gravitational redshift . 
[ 87 ] eventually , the falling object fades away until it can no longer be seen . 
typically this process happens very rapidly with an object disappearing from view within less than a second . [ 88 ] . 
on the other hand , indestructible observers falling into a black hole do not notice any of these effects as they cross the event horizon . 
according to their own clocks , which appear to them to tick normally , they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour ; in classical general relativity , it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations , due to einsteins equivalence principle . [ 89 ] [ 90 ] . 
the topology of the event horizon of a black hole at equilibrium is always spherical . 
[ note 4 ] [ 93 ] for non-rotating ( static ) black holes the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical , while for rotating black holes the event horizon is oblate . [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] . 
main article : gravitational singularity . 
at the centre of a black hole , as described by general relativity , may lie a gravitational singularity , a region where the spacetime curvature becomes infinite . 
[ 97 ] for a non-rotating black hole , this region takes the shape of a single point ; for a rotating black hole it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that lies in the plane of rotation . 
[ 98 ] in both cases , the singular region has zero volume . 
it can also be shown that the singular region contains all the mass of the black hole solution . 
[ 99 ] the singular region can thus be thought of as having infinite density . [ 100 ] . 
observers falling into a schwarzschild black hole ( i.e. , non-rotating and not charged ) can not avoid being carried into the singularity once they cross the event horizon . 
they can prolong the experience by accelerating away to slow their descent , but only up to a limit . 
[ 101 ] when they reach the singularity , they are crushed to infinite density and their mass is added to the total of the black hole . 
before that happens , they will have been torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as spaghettification or the noodle effect . [ 102 ] . 
in the case of a charged ( reissner–nordström ) or rotating ( kerr ) black hole , it is possible to avoid the singularity . 
extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole . 
[ 103 ] the possibility of traveling to another universe is , however , only theoretical since any perturbation would destroy this possibility . 
[ 104 ] it also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves ( returning to ones own past ) around the kerr singularity , which leads to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox . 
[ 105 ] it is expected that none of these peculiar effects would survive in a proper quantum treatment of rotating and charged black holes . [ 106 ] . 
the appearance of singularities in general relativity is commonly perceived as signaling the breakdown of the theory . 
[ 107 ] this breakdown , however , is expected ; it occurs in a situation where quantum effects should describe these actions , due to the extremely high density and therefore particle interactions . 
to date , it has not been possible to combine quantum and gravitational effects into a single theory , although there exist attempts to formulate such a theory of quantum gravity . 
it is generally expected that such a theory will not feature any singularities . [ 108 ] [ 109 ] . 
main article : photon sphere . 
the photon sphere is a spherical boundary of zero thickness in which photons that move on tangents to that sphere would be trapped in a circular orbit about the black hole . 
for non-rotating black holes , the photon sphere has a radius 1.5 times the schwarzschild radius . 
their orbits would be dynamically unstable , hence any small perturbation , such as a particle of infalling matter , would cause an instability that would grow over time , either setting the photon on an outward trajectory causing it to escape the black hole , or on an inward spiral where it would eventually cross the event horizon . [ 110 ] . 
while light can still escape from the photon sphere , any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole . 
hence any light that reaches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon . 
[ 110 ] for a kerr black hole the radius of the photon sphere depends on the spin parameter and on the details of the photon orbit , which can be prograde ( the photon rotates in the same sense of the black hole spin ) or retrograde . [ 111 ] [ 112 ] . 
main article : ergosphere . 
the ergosphere is a region outside of the event horizon , where objects can not remain in place . [ 113 ] . 
rotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stand still , called the ergosphere . 
this is the result of a process known as frame-dragging ; general relativity predicts that any rotating mass will tend to slightly drag along the spacetime immediately surrounding it . 
any object near the rotating mass will tend to start moving in the direction of rotation . 
for a rotating black hole , this effect is so strong near the event horizon that an object would have to move faster than the speed of light in the opposite direction to just stand still . [ 114 ] . 
the ergosphere of a black hole is a volume bounded by the black holes event horizon and the ergosurface , which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but is at a much greater distance around the equator . [ 113 ] . 
objects and radiation can escape normally from the ergosphere . 
through the penrose process , objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered with . 
the extra energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole . 
thereby the rotation of the black hole slows down . 
[ 115 ] a variation of the penrose process in the presence of strong magnetic fields , the blandford–znajek process is considered a likely mechanism for the enormous luminosity and relativistic jets of quasars and other active galactic nuclei . 
innermost stable circular orbit ( isco ) . 
main article : innermost stable circular orbit . 
in newtonian gravity , test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object . 
in general relativity , however , there exists an innermost stable circular orbit ( often called the isco ) , for which any infinitesimal inward perturbations to a circular orbit will lead to spiraling into the black hole , and any outward perturbations will , depending on the energy , result in spiraling in , stably orbiting between apastron and periastron , or escaping to infinity . 
[ 116 ] the location of the isco depends on the spin of the black hole , in the case of a schwarzschild black hole ( spin zero ) is : . 
i. s. c. o. . 
{ \displaystyle r_ { \rm { isco } } =3\ , r_ { s } = { \frac { 6\ , gm } { c^ { 2 } } } , } . 
and decreases with increasing black hole spin for particles orbiting in the same direction as the spin . [ 117 ] . 
formation and evolution . 
given the bizarre character of black holes , it was long questioned whether such objects could actually exist in nature or whether they were merely pathological solutions to einsteins equations . 
einstein himself wrongly thought black holes would not form , because he held that the angular momentum of collapsing particles would stabilize their motion at some radius . 
[ 118 ] this led the general relativity community to dismiss all results to the contrary for many years . 
however , a minority of relativists continued to contend that black holes were physical objects , [ 119 ] and by the end of the 1960s , they had persuaded the majority of researchers in the field that there is no obstacle to the formation of an event horizon . [ 120 ] . 
simulation of two black holes colliding . 
penrose demonstrated that once an event horizon forms , general relativity without quantum mechanics requires that a singularity will form within . 
[ 52 ] shortly afterwards , hawking showed that many cosmological solutions that describe the big bang have singularities without scalar fields or other exotic matter ( see penrose–hawking singularity theorems ) . 
[ clarification needed ] the kerr solution , the no-hair theorem , and the laws of black hole thermodynamics showed that the physical properties of black holes were simple and comprehensible , making them respectable subjects for research . 
[ 121 ] conventional black holes are formed by gravitational collapse of heavy objects such as stars , but they can also in theory be formed by other processes . [ 122 ] [ 123 ] . 
main article : gravitational collapse . 
gas cloud being ripped apart by black hole at the centre of the milky way ( observations from 2006 , 2010 and 2013 are shown in blue , green and red , respectively ) . [ 124 ] . 
gravitational collapse occurs when an objects internal pressure is insufficient to resist the objects own gravity . 
for stars this usually occurs either because a star has too little fuel left to maintain its temperature through stellar nucleosynthesis , or because a star that would have been stable receives extra matter in a way that does not raise its core temperature . 
in either case the stars temperature is no longer high enough to prevent it from collapsing under its own weight . [ 125 ] . 
the collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the stars constituents , allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state . 
the result is one of the various types of compact star . 
which type forms depends on the mass of the remnant of the original star left if the outer layers have been blown away ( for example , in a type ii supernova ) . 
the mass of the remnant , the collapsed object that survives the explosion , can be substantially less than that of the original star . 
remnants exceeding 5 m☉ are produced by stars that were over 20 m☉ before the collapse . [ 125 ] . 
if the mass of the remnant exceeds about 3–4 m☉ ( the tolman–oppenheimer–volkoff limit [ 33 ] ) , either because the original star was very heavy or because the remnant collected additional mass through accretion of matter , even the degeneracy pressure of neutrons is insufficient to stop the collapse . 
no known mechanism ( except possibly quark degeneracy pressure , see quark star ) is powerful enough to stop the implosion and the object will inevitably collapse to form a black hole . [ 125 ] . 
artists impression of supermassive black hole seed [ 126 ] . 
the gravitational collapse of heavy stars is assumed to be responsible for the formation of stellar mass black holes . 
star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars , which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to 103 m☉ . 
these black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centres of most galaxies . 
[ 127 ] it has further been suggested that massive black holes with typical masses of ~105 m☉ could have formed from the direct collapse of gas clouds in the young universe . 
[ 122 ] these massive objects have been proposed as the seeds that eventually formed the earliest quasars observed already at redshift . 
{ \displaystyle z\sim 7 } . 
[ 128 ] some candidates for such objects have been found in observations of the young universe . [ 122 ] . 
while most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emitted very quickly , an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process . 
even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter , a distant observer would see the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon , due to gravitational time dilation . 
light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer , with the light emitted just before the event horizon forms delayed an infinite amount of time . 
thus the external observer never sees the formation of the event horizon ; instead , the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted , eventually fading away . [ 129 ] . 
primordial black holes and the big bang . 
gravitational collapse requires great density . 
in the current epoch of the universe these high densities are found only in stars , but in the early universe shortly after the big bang densities were much greater , possibly allowing for the creation of black holes . 
high density alone is not enough to allow black hole formation since a uniform mass distribution will not allow the mass to bunch up . 
in order for primordial black holes to have formed in such a dense medium , there must have been initial density perturbations that could then grow under their own gravity . 
different models for the early universe vary widely in their predictions of the scale of these fluctuations . 
various models predict the creation of primordial black holes ranging in size from a planck mass ( . 
{ \displaystyle m_ { p } = { \sqrt { \hbar c/g } } } . 
≈ 1.2×1019 gev/c2 ≈ 2.2×10−8 kg ) to hundreds of thousands of solar masses . [ 123 ] . 
despite the early universe being extremely dense , it did not re-collapse into a black hole during the big bang , since the expansion rate was greater than the attraction . 
following inflation theory there was a net repulsive gravitation in the beginning until the end of inflation . 
since then the hubble flow was slowed by the energy density of the universe . 
models for the gravitational collapse of objects of relatively constant size , such as stars , do not necessarily apply in the same way to rapidly expanding space such as the big bang . [ 130 ] . 
simulated event in the cms detector : a collision in which a micro black hole may be created . 
gravitational collapse is not the only process that could create black holes . 
in principle , black holes could be formed in high-energy collisions that achieve sufficient density . 
as of 2002 , no such events have been detected , either directly or indirectly as a deficiency of the mass balance in particle accelerator experiments . 
[ 131 ] this suggests that there must be a lower limit for the mass of black holes . 
theoretically , this boundary is expected to lie around the planck mass , where quantum effects are expected to invalidate the predictions of general relativity . 
[ 132 ] this would put the creation of black holes firmly out of reach of any high-energy process occurring on or near the earth . 
however , certain developments in quantum gravity suggest that the minimum black hole mass could be much lower : some braneworld scenarios for example put the boundary as low as 1 tev/c2 . 
[ 133 ] this would make it conceivable for micro black holes to be created in the high-energy collisions that occur when cosmic rays hit the earths atmosphere , or possibly in the large hadron collider at cern . 
these theories are very speculative , and the creation of black holes in these processes is deemed unlikely by many specialists . 
[ 134 ] even if micro black holes could be formed , it is expected that they would evaporate in about 10−25 seconds , posing no threat to the earth . [ 135 ] . 
once a black hole has formed , it can continue to grow by absorbing additional matter . 
any black hole will continually absorb gas and interstellar dust from its surroundings . 
this growth process is one possible way through which some supermassive black holes may have been formed , although the formation of supermassive black holes is still an open field of research . 
[ 127 ] a similar process has been suggested for the formation of intermediate-mass black holes found in globular clusters . 
[ 136 ] black holes can also merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes . 
this is thought to have been important , especially in the early growth of supermassive black holes , which could have formed from the aggregation of many smaller objects . 
[ 127 ] the process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes . [ 137 ] [ 138 ] . 
main article : hawking radiation . 
in 1974 , hawking predicted that black holes are not entirely black but emit small amounts of thermal radiation at a temperature ℏc3/ ( 8πgmkb ) ; [ 58 ] this effect has become known as hawking radiation . 
by applying quantum field theory to a static black hole background , he determined that a black hole should emit particles that display a perfect black body spectrum . 
since hawkings publication , many others have verified the result through various approaches . 
[ 139 ] if hawkings theory of black hole radiation is correct , then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles . 
[ 58 ] the temperature of this thermal spectrum ( hawking temperature ) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole , which , for a schwarzschild black hole , is inversely proportional to the mass . 
hence , large black holes emit less radiation than small black holes . [ 140 ] . 
a stellar black hole of 1 m☉ has a hawking temperature of 62 nanokelvins . 
[ 141 ] this is far less than the 2.7 k temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation . 
stellar-mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrinking . 
[ 142 ] to have a hawking temperature larger than 2.7 k ( and be able to evaporate ) , a black hole would need a mass less than the moon . 
such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimeter . [ 143 ] . 
if a black hole is very small , the radiation effects are expected to become very strong . 
a black hole with the mass of a car would have a diameter of about 10−24 m and take a nanosecond to evaporate , during which time it would briefly have a luminosity of more than 200 times that of the sun . 
lower-mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster ; for example , a black hole of mass 1 tev/c2 would take less than 10−88 seconds to evaporate completely . 
for such a small black hole , quantum gravity effects are expected to play an important role and could hypothetically make such a small black hole stable , although current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate this is the case . [ 144 ] [ 145 ] . 
the hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak and would thus be exceedingly difficult to detect from earth . 
a possible exception , however , is the burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes . 
searches for such flashes have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes . 
[ 146 ] nasas fermi gamma-ray space telescope launched in 2008 will continue the search for these flashes . [ 147 ] . 
if black holes evaporate via hawking radiation , a solar mass black hole will evaporate ( beginning once the temperature of the cosmic microwave background drops below that of the black hole ) over a period of 1064 years . 
[ 148 ] a supermassive black hole with a mass of 1011 m☉ will evaporate in around 2×10100 years . 
[ 149 ] some monster black holes in the universe are predicted to continue to grow up to perhaps 1014 m☉ during the collapse of superclusters of galaxies . 
even these would evaporate over a timescale of up to 10106 years . [ 148 ] . 
by nature , black holes do not themselves emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical hawking radiation , so astrophysicists searching for black holes must generally rely on indirect observations . 
for example , a black holes existence can sometimes be inferred by observing its gravitational influence on its surroundings . [ 150 ] . 
on 10 april 2019 , an image was released of a black hole , which is seen magnified because the light paths near the event horizon are highly bent . 
the dark shadow in the middle results from light paths absorbed by the black hole . 
[ 151 ] the image is in false color , as the detected light halo in this image is not in the visible spectrum , but radio waves . 
artist ’ s impression of the closest black hole to earth and its sun-like companion star . 
this artists impression depicts the paths of photons in the vicinity of a black hole . 
the gravitational bending and capture of light by the event horizon is the cause of the shadow captured by the event horizon telescope . 
the event horizon telescope ( eht ) is an active program that directly observes the immediate environment of black holes event horizons , such as the black hole at the centre of the milky way . 
in april 2017 , eht began observing the black hole at the centre of messier 87 . 
[ 152 ] in all , eight radio observatories on six mountains and four continents observed the galaxy in virgo on and off for 10 days in april 2017 to provide the data yielding the image in april 2019 . 
[ 153 ] after two years of data processing , eht released the first direct image of a black hole ; specifically , the supermassive black hole that lies in the centre of the aforementioned galaxy . 
[ 154 ] [ 155 ] what is visible is not the black hole—which shows as black because of the loss of all light within this dark region . 
instead , it is the gases at the edge of the event horizon ( displayed as orange or red ) that define the black hole . [ 156 ] . 
on 12 may 2022 , the eht released the first image of sagittarius a * , the supermassive black hole at the centre of the milky way galaxy . 
the published image displayed the same ring-like structure and circular shadow as seen in the m87 * black hole , and the image was created using the same techniques as for the m87 black hole . 
however , the imaging process for sagittarius a * , which is more than a thousand times smaller and less massive than m87 * , was significantly more complex because of the instability of its surroundings . 
[ 157 ] the image of sagittarius a * was also partially blurred by turbulent plasma on the way to the galactic centre , an effect which prevents resolution of the image at longer wavelengths . [ 158 ] . 
the brightening of this material in the bottom half of the processed eht image is thought to be caused by doppler beaming , whereby material approaching the viewer at relativistic speeds is perceived as brighter than material moving away . 
in the case of a black hole , this phenomenon implies that the visible material is rotating at relativistic speeds ( > 1,000 km/s [ 2,200,000 mph ] ) , the only speeds at which it is possible to centrifugally balance the immense gravitational attraction of the singularity , and thereby remain in orbit above the event horizon . 
this configuration of bright material implies that the eht observed m87 * from a perspective catching the black holes accretion disc nearly edge-on , as the whole system rotated clockwise . 
[ 159 ] [ 160 ] however , the extreme gravitational lensing associated with black holes produces the illusion of a perspective that sees the accretion disc from above . 
in reality , most of the ring in the eht image was created when the light emitted by the far side of the accretion disc bent around the black holes gravity well and escaped , meaning that most of the possible perspectives on m87 * can see the entire disc , even that directly behind the shadow . 
in 2015 , the eht detected magnetic fields just outside the event horizon of sagittarius a * and even discerned some of their properties . 
the field lines that pass through the accretion disc were a complex mixture of ordered and tangled . 
theoretical studies of black holes had predicted the existence of magnetic fields . [ 161 ] [ 162 ] . 
predicted appearance of a non-rotating black hole with toroidal ring of ionised matter , such as has been proposed [ 163 ] as a model for sagittarius a * . 
the asymmetry is due to the doppler effect resulting from the enormous orbital speed needed for centrifugal balance of the powerful gravitational attraction of the hole . 
detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes . 
on 14 september 2015 , the ligo gravitational wave observatory made the first-ever successful direct observation of gravitational waves . 
[ 12 ] [ 164 ] the signal was consistent with theoretical predictions for the gravitational waves produced by the merger of two black holes : one with about 36 solar masses , and the other around 29 solar masses . 
[ 12 ] [ 165 ] this observation provides the most concrete evidence for the existence of black holes to date . 
for instance , the gravitational wave signal suggests that the separation of the two objects before the merger was just 350 km ( or roughly four times the schwarzschild radius corresponding to the inferred masses ) . 
the objects must therefore have been extremely compact , leaving black holes as the most plausible interpretation . [ 12 ] . 
more importantly , the signal observed by ligo also included the start of the post-merger ringdown , the signal produced as the newly formed compact object settles down to a stationary state . 
arguably , the ringdown is the most direct way of observing a black hole . 
[ 166 ] from the ligo signal , it is possible to extract the frequency and damping time of the dominant mode of the ringdown . 
from these , it is possible to infer the mass and angular momentum of the final object , which match independent predictions from numerical simulations of the merger . 
[ 167 ] the frequency and decay time of the dominant mode are determined by the geometry of the photon sphere . 
hence , observation of this mode confirms the presence of a photon sphere ; however , it can not exclude possible exotic alternatives to black holes that are compact enough to have a photon sphere . [ 166 ] . 
the observation also provides the first observational evidence for the existence of stellar-mass black hole binaries . 
furthermore , it is the first observational evidence of stellar-mass black holes weighing 25 solar masses or more . [ 168 ] . 
since then , many more gravitational wave events have been observed . [ 169 ] . 
proper motions of stars orbiting sagittarius a * . 
the proper motions of stars near the centre of our own milky way provide strong observational evidence that these stars are orbiting a supermassive black hole . 
[ 170 ] since 1995 , astronomers have tracked the motions of 90 stars orbiting an invisible object coincident with the radio source sagittarius a * . 
by fitting their motions to keplerian orbits , the astronomers were able to infer , in 1998 , that a 2.6×106 m☉ object must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0.02 light-years to cause the motions of those stars . 
[ 171 ] since then , one of the stars—called s2—has completed a full orbit . 
from the orbital data , astronomers were able to refine the calculations of the mass to 4.3×106 m☉ and a radius of less than 0.002 light-years for the object causing the orbital motion of those stars . 
[ 170 ] the upper limit on the objects size is still too large to test whether it is smaller than its schwarzschild radius ; nevertheless , these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume . 
[ 171 ] additionally , there is some observational evidence that this object might possess an event horizon , a feature unique to black holes . [ 172 ] . 
accretion of matter . 
see also : accretion disk . 
black hole with corona , x-ray source ( artists concept ) [ 173 ] . 
due to conservation of angular momentum , [ 174 ] gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disk-like structure around the object . 
artists impressions such as the accompanying representation of a black hole with corona commonly depict the black hole as if it were a flat-space body hiding the part of the disk just behind it , but in reality gravitational lensing would greatly distort the image of the accretion disk . [ 175 ] . 
nasa simulated view from outside the horizon of a schwarzschild black hole lit by a thin accretion disk . 
within such a disk , friction would cause angular momentum to be transported outward , allowing matter to fall farther inward , thus releasing potential energy and increasing the temperature of the gas . [ 176 ] . 
blurring of x-rays near black hole ( nustar ; 12 august 2014 ) [ 173 ] . 
when the accreting object is a neutron star or a black hole , the gas in the inner accretion disk orbits at very high speeds because of its proximity to the compact object . 
the resulting friction is so significant that it heats the inner disk to temperatures at which it emits vast amounts of electromagnetic radiation ( mainly x-rays ) . 
these bright x-ray sources may be detected by telescopes . 
this process of accretion is one of the most efficient energy-producing processes known ; up to 40 % of the rest mass of the accreted material can be emitted as radiation . 
[ 176 ] ( in nuclear fusion only about 0.7 % of the rest mass will be emitted as energy . ) 
in many cases , accretion disks are accompanied by relativistic jets that are emitted along the poles , which carry away much of the energy . 
the mechanism for the creation of these jets is currently not well understood , in part due to insufficient data . [ 177 ] . 
as such , many of the universes more energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes . 
in particular , active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion disks of supermassive black holes . 
[ 178 ] similarly , x-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion . 
[ 178 ] it has also been suggested that some ultraluminous x-ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate-mass black holes . [ 179 ] . 
in november 2011 the first direct observation of a quasar accretion disk around a supermassive black hole was reported . [ 180 ] [ 181 ] . 
see also : x-ray binary . 
computer simulation of a star being consumed by a black hole . 
the blue dot indicates the location of the black hole . 
this animation compares the x-ray heartbeats of grs 1915 and igr j17091 , two black holes that ingest gas from companion stars . 
a chandra x-ray observatory image of cygnus x-1 , which was the first strong black hole candidate discovered . 
x-ray binaries are binary star systems that emit a majority of their radiation in the x-ray part of the spectrum . 
these x-ray emissions are generally thought to result when one of the stars ( compact object ) accretes matter from another ( regular ) star . 
the presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides an opportunity for studying the central object and to determine if it might be a black hole . [ 178 ] . 
if such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object , it can not be a black hole . 
the absence of such a signal does , however , not exclude the possibility that the compact object is a neutron star . 
by studying the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and to obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object . 
if this is much larger than the tolman–oppenheimer–volkoff limit ( the maximum mass a star can have without collapsing ) then the object can not be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole . [ 178 ] . 
the first strong candidate for a black hole , cygnus x-1 , was discovered in this way by charles thomas bolton , [ 182 ] louise webster , and paul murdin [ 183 ] in 1972 . 
[ 184 ] [ 185 ] some doubt , however , remained due to the uncertainties that result from the companion star being much heavier than the candidate black hole . 
currently , better candidates for black holes are found in a class of x-ray binaries called soft x-ray transients . 
in this class of system , the companion star is of relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass . 
moreover , these systems actively emit x-rays for only several months once every 10–50 years . 
during the period of low x-ray emission ( called quiescence ) , the accretion disk is extremely faint allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period . 
one of the best such candidates is v404 cygni . [ 178 ] . 
main article : quasi-periodic oscillation . 
the x-ray emissions from accretion disks sometimes flicker at certain frequencies . 
these signals are called quasi-periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk ( the innermost stable circular orbit ) . 
as such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object . 
they can thus be used as an alternative way to determine the mass of candidate black holes . [ 186 ] . 
see also : active galactic nucleus . 
magnetic waves , called alfvén s-waves , flow from the base of black hole jets . 
astronomers use the term active galaxy to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics , such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission . 
theoretical and observational studies have shown that the activity in these active galactic nuclei ( agn ) may be explained by the presence of supermassive black holes , which can be millions of times more massive than stellar ones . 
the models of these agn consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the sun ; a disk of interstellar gas and dust called an accretion disk ; and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk . [ 187 ] [ 188 ] . 
detection of unusually bright x-ray flare from sagittarius a * , a black hole in the centre of the milky way galaxy on 5 january 2015 [ 189 ] . 
although supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most agn , only some galaxies nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates . 
some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the andromeda galaxy , m32 , m87 , ngc 3115 , ngc 3377 , ngc 4258 , ngc 4889 , ngc 1277 , oj 287 , apm 08279+5255 and the sombrero galaxy . [ 190 ] . 
it is now widely accepted that the centre of nearly every galaxy , not just active ones , contains a supermassive black hole . 
[ 191 ] the close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxys bulge , known as the m–sigma relation , strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and that of the galaxy itself . [ 192 ] . 
simulation of gas cloud after close approach to the black hole at the centre of the milky way . [ 193 ] . 
another way the black hole nature of an object may be tested is through observation of effects caused by a strong gravitational field in their vicinity . 
one such effect is gravitational lensing : the deformation of spacetime around a massive object causes light rays to be deflected , such as light passing through an optic lens . 
observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing , in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds . 
microlensing occurs when the sources are unresolved and the observer sees a small brightening . 
in january 2022 , astronomers reported the first possible detection of a microlensing event from an isolated black hole . [ 194 ] . 
another possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars orbiting the black hole . 
there are several candidates for such an observation in orbit around sagittarius a * . [ 195 ] . 
see also : exotic star . 
the evidence for stellar black holes strongly relies on the existence of an upper limit for the mass of a neutron star . 
the size of this limit heavily depends on the assumptions made about the properties of dense matter . 
new exotic phases of matter could push up this bound . 
[ 178 ] a phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars , [ 196 ] and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of q stars . 
[ 197 ] some extensions of the standard model posit the existence of preons as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons , which could hypothetically form preon stars . 
[ 198 ] these hypothetical models could potentially explain a number of observations of stellar black hole candidates . 
however , it can be shown from arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass . [ 178 ] . 
since the average density of a black hole inside its schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass , supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes ( the average density of a 108 m☉ black hole is comparable to that of water ) . 
[ 178 ] consequently , the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane . 
for example , a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects . 
however , such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates . [ 178 ] . 
the evidence for the existence of stellar and supermassive black holes implies that in order for black holes to not form , general relativity must fail as a theory of gravity , perhaps due to the onset of quantum mechanical corrections . 
a much anticipated feature of a theory of quantum gravity is that it will not feature singularities or event horizons and thus black holes would not be real artifacts . 
[ 199 ] for example , in the fuzzball model based on string theory , the individual states of a black hole solution do not generally have an event horizon or singularity , but for a classical/semi-classical observer the statistical average of such states appears just as an ordinary black hole as deduced from general relativity . [ 200 ] . 
a few theoretical objects have been conjectured to match observations of astronomical black hole candidates identically or near-identically , but which function via a different mechanism . 
these include the gravastar , the black star , [ 201 ] and the dark-energy star . [ 202 ] . 
entropy and thermodynamics . 
further information : black hole thermodynamics and bekenstein bound . 
s = 1/4 c3k/għ athe formula for the bekenstein–hawking entropy ( s ) of a black hole , which depends on the area of the black hole ( a ) . 
the constants are the speed of light ( c ) , the boltzmann constant ( k ) , newtons constant ( g ) , and the reduced planck constant ( ħ ) . 
in planck units , this reduces to s = a/4 . 
in 1971 , hawking showed under general conditions [ note 5 ] that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease , even if they collide and merge . 
[ 203 ] this result , now known as the second law of black hole mechanics , is remarkably similar to the second law of thermodynamics , which states that the total entropy of an isolated system can never decrease . 
as with classical objects at absolute zero temperature , it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy . 
if this were the case , the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy-laden matter entering a black hole , resulting in a decrease in the total entropy of the universe . 
therefore , bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy , and that it should be proportional to its horizon area . [ 204 ] . 
the link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by hawkings discovery in 1974 that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature . 
this seemingly causes a violation of the second law of black hole mechanics , since the radiation will carry away energy from the black hole causing it to shrink . 
the radiation , however also carries away entropy , and it can be proven under general assumptions that the sum of the entropy of the matter surrounding a black hole and one quarter of the area of the horizon as measured in planck units is in fact always increasing . 
this allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics , with the mass acting as energy , the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy . [ 204 ] . 
one puzzling feature is that the entropy of a black hole scales with its area rather than with its volume , since entropy is normally an extensive quantity that scales linearly with the volume of the system . 
this odd property led gerard t hooft and leonard susskind to propose the holographic principle , which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume . [ 205 ] . 
although general relativity can be used to perform a semi-classical calculation of black hole entropy , this situation is theoretically unsatisfying . 
in statistical mechanics , entropy is understood as counting the number of microscopic configurations of a system that have the same macroscopic qualities ( such as mass , charge , pressure , etc . ) . 
without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity , one can not perform such a computation for black holes . 
some progress has been made in various approaches to quantum gravity . 
in 1995 , andrew strominger and cumrun vafa showed that counting the microstates of a specific supersymmetric black hole in string theory reproduced the bekenstein–hawking entropy . 
[ 206 ] since then , similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity . [ 207 ] . 
another promising approach is constituted by treating gravity as an effective field theory . 
one first computes the quantum gravitational corrections to the radius of the event horizon of the black hole , then integrates over it to find the quantum gravitational corrections to the entropy as given by the wald formula . 
the method was applied for schwarzschild black holes by calmet and kuipers , [ 208 ] then successfully generalised for charged black holes by campos delgado . [ 209 ] . 
information loss paradox . 
main article : black hole information paradox . 
unsolved problem in physics : . 
is physical information lost in black holes ? . 
( more unsolved problems in physics ) . 
because a black hole has only a few internal parameters , most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost . 
regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole , it appears that only information concerning the total mass , charge , and angular momentum are conserved . 
as long as black holes were thought to persist forever this information loss is not that problematic , as the information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole , inaccessible from the outside , but represented on the event horizon in accordance with the holographic principle . 
however , black holes slowly evaporate by emitting hawking radiation . 
this radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole , meaning that this information appears to be gone forever . [ 210 ] . 
the question whether information is truly lost in black holes ( the black hole information paradox ) has divided the theoretical physics community ( see thorne–hawking–preskill bet ) . 
in quantum mechanics , loss of information corresponds to the violation of a property called unitarity , and it has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy , [ 211 ] though this has also been disputed . 
[ 212 ] over recent years evidence has been building that indeed information and unitarity are preserved in a full quantum gravitational treatment of the problem . [ 213 ] . 
one attempt to resolve the black hole information paradox is known as black hole complementarity . 
in 2012 , the firewall paradox was introduced with the goal of demonstrating that black hole complementarity fails to solve the information paradox . 
according to quantum field theory in curved spacetime , a single emission of hawking radiation involves two mutually entangled particles . 
the outgoing particle escapes and is emitted as a quantum of hawking radiation ; the infalling particle is swallowed by the black hole . 
assume a black hole formed a finite time in the past and will fully evaporate away in some finite time in the future . 
then , it will emit only a finite amount of information encoded within its hawking radiation . 
according to research by physicists like don page [ 214 ] [ 215 ] and leonard susskind , there will eventually be a time by which an outgoing particle must be entangled with all the hawking radiation the black hole has previously emitted . 
this seemingly creates a paradox : a principle called monogamy of entanglement requires that , like any quantum system , the outgoing particle can not be fully entangled with two other systems at the same time ; yet here the outgoing particle appears to be entangled both with the infalling particle and , independently , with past hawking radiation . 
[ 216 ] in order to resolve this contradiction , physicists may eventually be forced to give up one of three time-tested principles : einsteins equivalence principle , unitarity , or local quantum field theory . 
one possible solution , which violates the equivalence principle , is that a firewall destroys incoming particles at the event horizon . 
[ 217 ] in general , which—if any—of these assumptions should be abandoned remains a topic of debate . [ 212 ] . 
binary black hole . 
black brane or black string . 
black hole initiative . 
black hole starship . 
black holes in fiction . 
btz black hole . 
direct collapse black hole . 
hypothetical black hole ( disambiguation ) . 
kugelblitz ( astrophysics ) . 
list of black holes . 
list of nearest black holes . 
outline of black holes . 
sonic black hole . 
timeline of black hole physics . 
^ the value of cj/gm2 can exceed 1 for objects other than black holes . 
the largest value known for a neutron star is ≤ 0.4 , and commonly used equations of state would limit that value to < 0.7 . [ 76 ] . 
^ the ( outer ) event horizon radius scales as : . 
{ \displaystyle m+ { \sqrt { m^ { 2 } - { ( j/m ) } ^ { 2 } -q^ { 2 } } } . } . 
^ the set of possible paths , or more accurately the future light cone containing all possible world lines ( in this diagram the light cone is represented by the v-shaped region bounded by arrows representing light ray world lines ) , is tilted in this way in eddington–finkelstein coordinates ( the diagram is a cartoon version of an eddington–finkelstein coordinate diagram ) , but in other coordinates the light cones are not tilted in this way , for example in schwarzschild coordinates they narrow without tilting as one approaches the event horizon , and in kruskal–szekeres coordinates the light cones do not change shape or orientation at all . [ 79 ] . 
^ this is true only for four-dimensional spacetimes . 
in higher dimensions more complicated horizon topologies like a black ring are possible . [ 91 ] [ 92 ] . 
^ in particular , he assumed that all matter satisfies the weak energy condition . 
^ oldham , l. j. ; auger , m. w. ( march 2016 ) . 
galaxy structure from multiple tracers – ii . 
m87 from parsec to megaparsec scales . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
457 ( 1 ) : 421–439 . 
^ wald 1984 , pp . 299–300 . 
^ a b wald , r. m. ( 1997 ) . 
gravitational collapse and cosmic censorship . 
in iyer , b. r. ; bhawal , b . 
( eds . ) . 
black holes , gravitational radiation and the universe . 
dordrecht : springer . 
pp . 69–86 . 
arxiv : gr-qc/9710068 . 
^ overbye , dennis ( 8 june 2015 ) . 
black hole hunters . 
archived from the original on 9 june 2015 . 
retrieved 8 june 2015. . 
^ hamilton , a . 
journey into a schwarzschild black hole . 
archived from the original on 3 september 2019 . 
retrieved 28 june 2020. . 
^ schutz , bernard f. ( 2003 ) . 
gravity from the ground up . 
cambridge university press . 
archived from the original on 2 december 2016. . 
^ davies , p. c. w. ( 1978 ) . 
thermodynamics of black holes ( pdf ) . 
reports on progress in physics . 
41 ( 8 ) : 1313–1355 . 
archived from the original ( pdf ) on 10 may 2013. . 
^ a b c montgomery , colin ; orchiston , wayne ; whittingham , ian ( 2009 ) . 
michell , laplace and the origin of the black hole concept . 
journal of astronomical history and heritage . 
12 ( 2 ) : 90–96 . 
^ webster , b. louise ; murdin , paul ( 1972 ) , cygnus x-1—a spectroscopic binary with a heavy companion ? , nature , 235 ( 5332 ) : 37–38 , bibcode:1972natur.235.37w , doi:10.1038/235037a0 , s2cid 4195462. . 
^ bolton , c. t. ( 1972 ) , identification of cygnus x-1 with hde 226868 , nature , 235 ( 5336 ) : 271–273 , bibcode:1972natur.235.271b , doi:10.1038/235271b0 , s2cid 4222070. . 
^ clery d ( 2020 ) . 
black holes caught in the act of swallowing stars . 
367 ( 6477 ) : 495 . 
^ a b c d abbott , b.p . 
; et al . 
( 2016 ) . 
observation of gravitational waves from a binary black hole merger . 
116 ( 6 ) : 061102. arxiv:1602.03837 . 
^ event horizon telescope , the ( 2019 ) . 
first m87 event horizon telescope results . 
the shadow of the supermassive black hole . 
the astrophysical journal . 
875 ( 1 ) : l1 . 
^ bouman , katherine l. ; johnson , michael d. ; zoran , daniel ; fish , vincent l. ; doeleman , sheperd s. ; freeman , william t. ( 2016 ) . 
computational imaging for vlbi image reconstruction . 
2016 ieee conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ( cvpr ) . 
pp . 913–922 . 
^ gardiner , aidan ( 12 april 2018 ) . 
when a black hole finally reveals itself , it helps to have our very own cosmic reporter – astronomers announced wednesday that they had captured the first image of a black hole . 
the timess dennis overbye answers readers questions . 
the new york times . 
archived from the original on 1 january 2022 . 
retrieved 15 april 2019. . 
^ eso instrument finds closest black hole to earth . 
european southern observatory . 
6 may 2020 . 
archived from the original on 6 may 2020 . 
retrieved 2 april 2021. . 
^ riazuelo , alain ( 2019 ) . 
seeing relativity -- i. ray tracing in a schwarzschild metric to explore the maximal analytic extension of the metric and making a proper rendering of the stars . 
international journal of modern physics d. 28 ( 2 ) : 1950042. arxiv:1511.06025 . 
^ schaffer , simon ( 1979 ) . 
john michell and black holes . 
journal for the history of astronomy . 
10 : 42–43 . 
archived from the original on 22 may 2020 . 
retrieved 27 august 2021. . 
^ michell , j . 
( 1784 ) . 
on the means of discovering the distance , magnitude , & c. of the fixed stars , in consequence of the diminution of the velocity of their light , in case such a diminution should be found to take place in any of them , and such other data should be procured from observations , as would be farther necessary for that purpose . 
philosophical transactions of the royal society . 
74 : 35–57 . 
^ a b thorne 1994 , pp . 123–124 . 
^ slayter , elizabeth m. ; slayter , henry s. ( 1992 ) . 
light and electron microscopy . 
cambridge university press . 
archived from the original on 30 november 2017. . 
^ crass , institute of astronomy – design by d.r . 
wilkins and s.j . 
light escaping from black holes . 
archived from the original on 6 july 2019 . 
retrieved 10 march 2018. . 
^ levy , adam ( 11 january 2021 ) . 
how black holes morphed from theory to reality . 
retrieved 25 march 2022. . 
^ a b schwarzschild , k. ( 1916 ) . 
über das gravitationsfeld eines massenpunktes nach der einsteinschen theorie . 
sitzungsberichte der königlich preussischen akademie der wissenschaften . 
7 : 189–196 . 
translation : antoci , s. ; loinger , a . 
( 1999 ) . 
on the gravitational field of a mass point according to einsteins theory . 
arxiv : physics/9905030 . 
and schwarzschild , k. ( 1916 ) . 
über das gravitationsfeld einer kugel aus inkompressibler flüssigkeit nach der einsteinschen theorie . 
sitzungsberichte der königlich preussischen akademie der wissenschaften . 
18 : 424–434 . 
translation : antoci , s. ( 1999 ) . 
on the gravitational field of a sphere of incompressible fluid according to einsteins theory . 
arxiv : physics/9912033 . 
^ droste , j . 
( 1917 ) . 
on the field of a single centre in einsteins theory of gravitation , and the motion of a particle in that field ( pdf ) . 
proceedings royal academy amsterdam . 
19 ( 1 ) : 197–215 . 
archived from the original ( pdf ) on 18 may 2013 . 
retrieved 16 september 2012. . 
^ kox , a. j . 
( 1992 ) . 
general relativity in the netherlands : 1915–1920 . 
in eisenstaedt , jean ; kox , a. j . 
( eds . ) . 
studies in the history of general relativity . 
archived from the original on 10 august 2016 . 
retrieved 23 february 2016. . 
^ t hooft , g. ( 2009 ) . 
introduction to the theory of black holes ( pdf ) . 
institute for theoretical physics / spinoza institute . 
pp . 47–48 . 
archived from the original ( pdf ) on 21 may 2009 . 
retrieved 24 june 2010. . 
^ eddington , arthur ( 1926 ) . 
the internal constitution of the stars . 
vol . 52 . 
cambridge university press . 
pp . 233–40 . 
archived from the original on 11 august 2016. . 
^ thorne , kip s. ; hawking , stephen ( 1994 ) . 
black holes and time warps : einsteins outrageous legacy . 
w. w. norton & company . 
pp . 134–135 . 
retrieved 12 april 2019 . 
the first conclusion was the newtonian version of light not escaping ; the second was a semi-accurate , relativistic description ; and the third was typical eddingtonian hyperbole . 
when a star is as small as the critical circumference , the curvature is strong but not infinite , and space is definitely not wrapped around the star . 
eddington may have known this , but his description made a good story , and it captured in a whimsical way the spirit of schwarzschilds spacetime curvature . 
^ venkataraman , g. ( 1992 ) . 
chandrasekhar and his limit . 
archived from the original on 11 august 2016. . 
^ detweiler , s. ( 1981 ) . 
resource letter bh-1 : black holes . 
american journal of physics . 
49 ( 5 ) : 394–400 . 
^ harpaz , a . 
( 1994 ) . 
a k peters . 
archived from the original on 11 august 2016. . 
^ a b oppenheimer , j. r. ; volkoff , g. m. ( 1939 ) . 
on massive neutron cores . 
55 ( 4 ) : 374–381 . 
^ bombaci , i . 
( 1996 ) . 
the maximum mass of a neutron star . 
astronomy and astrophysics . 
305 : 871–877 . 
bibcode:1996a & a.305.871b . 
^ cho , a . 
( 16 february 2018 ) . 
a weight limit emerges for neutron stars . 
359 ( 6377 ) : 724–725 . 
^ margalit , b. ; metzger , b. d. ( 1 december 2017 ) . 
constraining the maximum mass of neutron stars from multi-messenger observations of gw170817 . 
the astrophysical journal . 
850 ( 2 ) : l19 . 
^ shibata , m. ; fujibayashi , s. ; hotokezaka , k. ; kiuchi , k. ; kyutoku , k. ; sekiguchi , y. ; tanaka , m. ( 22 december 2017 ) . 
modeling gw170817 based on numerical relativity and its implications . 
physical review d. 96 ( 12 ) : 123012. arxiv:1710.07579 . 
^ ruiz , m. ; shapiro , s. l. ; tsokaros , a . 
( 11 january 2018 ) . 
gw170817 , general relativistic magnetohydrodynamic simulations , and the neutron star maximum mass . 
physical review d. 97 ( 2 ) : 021501. arxiv:1711.00473 . 
^ rezzolla , l. ; most , e. r. ; weih , l. r. ( 9 january 2018 ) . 
using gravitational-wave observations and quasi-universal relations to constrain the maximum mass of neutron stars . 
852 ( 2 ) : l25 . 
^ ruffini , r. ; wheeler , j . 
( 1971 ) . 
introducing the black hole ( pdf ) . 
24 ( 1 ) : 30–41 . 
archived from the original ( pdf ) on 25 july 2011 . 
retrieved 5 december 2009. . 
^ finkelstein , d. ( 1958 ) . 
past-future asymmetry of the gravitational field of a point particle . 
110 ( 4 ) : 965–967 . 
^ kruskal , m. ( 1960 ) . 
maximal extension of schwarzschild metric . 
119 ( 5 ) : 1743 . 
^ hewish , a. ; et al . 
( 1968 ) . 
observation of a rapidly pulsating radio source . 
217 ( 5130 ) : 709–713 . 
^ pilkington , j. d. h. ; et al . 
( 1968 ) . 
observations of some further pulsed radio sources . 
218 ( 5137 ) : 126–129 . 
^ hewish , a . 
( 1970 ) . 
annual review of astronomy and astrophysics . 
8 ( 1 ) : 265–296 . 
bibcode:1970ara & a.8.265h . 
^ newman , e. t. ; et al . 
( 1965 ) . 
metric of a rotating , charged mass . 
journal of mathematical physics . 
6 ( 6 ) : 918 . 
^ israel , w. ( 1967 ) . 
event horizons in static vacuum space-times . 
164 ( 5 ) : 1776 . 
^ carter , b . 
( 1971 ) . 
axisymmetric black hole has only two degrees of freedom . 
physical review letters . 
26 ( 6 ) : 331 . 
^ carter , b . 
( 1977 ) . 
the vacuum black hole uniqueness theorem and its conceivable generalisations . 
proceedings of the 1st marcel grossmann meeting on general relativity . 
pp . 243–254 . 
^ robinson , d. ( 1975 ) . 
uniqueness of the kerr black hole . 
physical review letters . 
34 ( 14 ) : 905 . 
^ a b heusler , m. ( 2012 ) . 
stationary black holes : uniqueness and beyond . 
living reviews in relativity . 
15 ( 7 ) : 7. arxiv:1205.6112 . 
^ a b penrose , r. ( 1965 ) . 
gravitational collapse and space-time singularities ( pdf ) . 
physical review letters . 
14 ( 3 ) : 57 . 
archived from the original ( pdf ) on 11 october 2020. . 
^ ford , l. h. ( 2003 ) . 
the classical singularity theorems and their quantum loopholes . 
international journal of theoretical physics . 
42 ( 6 ) : 1219–1227 . 
arxiv : gr-qc/0301045 . 
^ the nobel prize in physics 2020 . 
archived from the original on 24 april 2021 . 
retrieved 8 october 2020. . 
^ rolston , bruce ( 10 november 1997 ) , the first black hole , university of toronto , archived from the original on 7 march 2008 , retrieved 11 march 2008. . 
^ shipman , h. l. ; yu , z ; du , y.w ( 1975 ) , the implausible history of triple star models for cygnus x-1 evidence for a black hole , astrophysical letters , 16 ( 1 ) : 9–12 , bibcode:1975apl.16.9s , doi:10.1016/s0304-8853 ( 99 ) 00384-4. . 
^ bardeen , j. m. ; carter , b. ; hawking , s. w. ( 1973 ) . 
the four laws of black hole mechanics . 
communications in mathematical physics . 
31 ( 2 ) : 161–170 . 
archived from the original on 16 may 2020 . 
retrieved 4 june 2021. . 
^ a b c hawking , s. w. ( 1974 ) . 
black hole explosions ? . 
248 ( 5443 ) : 30–31 . 
^ mills , virginia ( 4 june 2019 ) . 
black holes : who didnt see them first ? . 
the royal society . 
retrieved 21 july 2022 . 
michell , john ( 1784 ) . 
on the means of discovering the distance , magnitude , & c. of the fixed stars , in consequence of the diminution of the velocity of their light , in case such a diminution should be found to take place in any of them , and such other data should be procured from observations , as would be farther necessary for that purpose . 
by the rev . 
john michell , b. d. f. r. s. in a letter to henry cavendish , esq . 
f. r. s. and a. s. philosophical transactions of the royal society of london . 
74 : 35–57 . 
retrieved 21 july 2022. . 
^ a b mits marcia bartusiak on understanding our place in the universe . 
archived from the original on 12 april 2019 . 
retrieved 12 april 2019. . 
^ a b siegfried , tom ( 23 december 2013 ) . 
50 years later , its hard to say who named black holes . 
archived from the original on 9 march 2017 . 
retrieved 24 september 2017 . 
it seems that the black hole label was also bandied about in january 1964 in cleveland at a meeting of the american association for the advancement of science . 
science news letter reporter ann ewing reported from that meeting , describing how an intense gravitational field could cause a star to collapse in on itself . 
such a star then forms a black hole in the universe , ewing wrote . 
^ brown , emma ( 3 august 2010 ) . 
ann e. ewing , journalist first reported black holes . 
archived from the original on 24 september 2017 . 
retrieved 24 september 2017. . 
^ pioneering physicist john wheeler dies at 96 . 
archived from the original on 28 november 2016 . 
retrieved 27 november 2016. . 
^ overbye , dennis ( 14 april 2008 ) . 
john a. wheeler , physicist who coined the term black hole , is dead at 96 . 
the new york times . 
archived from the original on 22 november 2016 . 
retrieved 27 november 2016. . 
^ carroll 2004 , p. 253. . 
^ reynolds , christopher s. ( january 2019 ) . 
observing black holes spin . 
3 ( 1 ) : 41–47 . 
archived from the original on 18 november 2020 . 
retrieved 21 august 2020. . 
^ thorne , k. s. ; price , r. h. ( 1986 ) . 
black holes : the membrane paradigm . 
yale university press . 
^ anderson , warren g. ( 1996 ) . 
the black hole information loss problem . 
usenet physics faq . 
archived from the original on 22 january 2009 . 
retrieved 24 march 2009. . 
^ preskill , j . 
( 21 october 1994 ) . 
black holes and information : a crisis in quantum physics ( pdf ) . 
caltech theory seminar . 
archived from the original ( pdf ) on 18 may 2008 . 
retrieved 17 may 2009. . 
^ hawking & ellis 1973 , appendix b. . 
^ seeds , michael a. ; backman , dana e. ( 2007 ) . 
perspectives on astronomy . 
archived from the original on 10 august 2016. . 
^ shapiro , s. l. ; teukolsky , s. a . 
( 1983 ) . 
black holes , white dwarfs , and neutron stars : the physics of compact objects . 
john wiley and sons . 
^ berger , b. k. ( 2002 ) . 
numerical approaches to spacetime singularities . 
living reviews in relativity . 
5 ( 1 ) : 2002–1 . 
arxiv : gr-qc/0201056 . 
^ mcclintock , j. e. ; shafee , r. ; narayan , r. ; remillard , r. a. ; davis , s. w. ; li , l.-x . 
( 2006 ) . 
the spin of the near-extreme kerr black hole grs 1915+105 . 
652 ( 1 ) : 518–539 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0606076 . 
^ a b c abbott , b. p. ; et al . 
( ligo scientific collaboration and virgo collaboration ) ( 1 june 2017 ) . 
gw170104 : observation of a 50-solar-mass binary black hole coalescence at redshift 0.2 . 
physical review letters . 
118 ( 22 ) : 221101. arxiv:1706.01812 . 
^ abbott , b. p. ; et al . 
( ligo scientific collaboration & virgo collaboration ) ( 16 october 2017 ) . 
gw170817 : observation of gravitational waves from a binary neutron star inspiral . 
physical review letters . 
119 ( 16 ) : 161101. arxiv:1710.05832 . 
^ wald 1984 , pp . 124–125 . 
^ saa , alberto ; santarelli , raphael ( 18 july 2011 ) . 
destroying a near-extremal kerr–newman black hole . 
physical review d. 84 ( 2 ) : 027501. arxiv:1105.3950 . 
^ misner , thorne & wheeler 1973 , p. 848. . 
^ davies , paul ( 1992 ) . 
the new physics ( illustrated ed . ) . 
cambridge university press . 
archived from the original on 17 august 2021 . 
retrieved 25 september 2020 . 
extract of page 26 archived 15 august 2021 at the wayback machine . 
^ fleisch , daniel ; kregenow , julia ( 2013 ) . 
a students guide to the mathematics of astronomy ( illustrated ed . ) . 
cambridge university press . 
archived from the original on 17 august 2021 . 
retrieved 25 september 2020 . 
extract of page 168 archived 17 august 2021 at the wayback machine . 
^ wheeler 2007 , p. 179. . 
^ carroll 2004 , ch . 
5.4 and 7.3. . 
^ singularities and black holes > lightcones and causal structure . 
stanford encyclopedia of philosophy . 
archived from the original on 17 may 2019 . 
retrieved 11 march 2018. . 
^ carroll 2004 , p. 217. . 
^ carroll 2004 , p. 218. . 
^ inside a black hole . 
knowing the universe and its secrets . 
archived from the original on 23 april 2009 . 
retrieved 26 march 2009. . 
^ what happens to you if you fall into a black hole . 
archived from the original on 13 february 2019 . 
retrieved 11 march 2018. . 
^ carroll 2004 , p. 222. . 
^ watch : three ways an astronaut could fall into a black hole . 
1 february 2014 . 
archived from the original on 15 april 2019 . 
retrieved 13 march 2018. . 
^ emparan , r. ; reall , h. s. ( 2008 ) . 
black holes in higher dimensions . 
living reviews in relativity . 
11 ( 6 ) : 6. arxiv:0801.3471 . 
^ obers , n. a . 
( 2009 ) . 
papantonopoulos , eleftherios ( ed . ) . 
black holes in higher-dimensional gravity ( pdf ) . 
physics of black holes . 
lecture notes in physics . 
vol . 769 . 
berlin , heidelberg . 
pp . 211–258 . 
archived ( pdf ) from the original on 26 july 2018 . 
retrieved 27 july 2018. . 
^ hawking & ellis 1973 , ch . 
^ smarr , l. ( 1973 ) . 
surface geometry of charged rotating black holes . 
physical review d. 7 ( 2 ) : 289–295 . 
^ visser , m. ( 22 january 2009 ) . 
the kerr spacetime : a brief introduction . 
in wiltshire , d.l . 
; visser , m. ; scott , s.m . 
( eds . ) . 
the kerr spacetime : rotating black holes in general relativity . 
cambridge university press . 
archived from the original on 20 may 2020 . 
retrieved 12 january 2020. . 
^ delgado , j.f . 
m. ; herdeiro , c.a . 
r. ; radu , e. ( 2018 ) . 
horizon geometry for kerr black holes with synchronized hair . 
physical review d. 97 ( 12 ) : 124012. arxiv:1804.04910 . 
^ carroll 2004 , p. 205. . 
^ carroll 2004 , pp . 264–265 . 
^ carroll 2004 , p. 252. . 
^ sizes of black holes ? 
how big is a black hole ? . 
sky & telescope . 
22 july 2014 . 
archived from the original on 3 april 2019 . 
retrieved 9 october 2018. . 
^ lewis , g. f. ; kwan , j . 
( 2007 ) . 
no way back : maximizing survival time below the schwarzschild event horizon . 
publications of the astronomical society of australia . 
24 ( 2 ) : 46–52 . 
^ wheeler 2007 , p. 182. . 
^ carroll 2004 , pp . 
257–259 and 265–266 . 
^ droz , s. ; israel , w. ; morsink , s. m. ( 1996 ) . 
black holes : the inside story . 
9 ( 1 ) : 34–37 . 
^ carroll 2004 , p. 266. . 
^ poisson , e. ; israel , w. ( 1990 ) . 
internal structure of black holes . 
physical review d. 41 ( 6 ) : 1796–1809 . 
^ wald 1984 , p. 212. . 
^ hamade , r. ( 1996 ) . 
black holes and quantum gravity . 
cambridge relativity and cosmology . 
university of cambridge . 
archived from the original on 7 april 2009 . 
retrieved 26 march 2009. . 
^ palmer , d. ask an astrophysicist : quantum gravity and black holes . 
archived from the original on 28 march 2009 . 
retrieved 26 march 2009. . 
^ a b nitta , daisuke ; chiba , takeshi ; sugiyama , naoshi ( september 2011 ) . 
shadows of colliding black holes . 
physical review d. 84 ( 6 ) : 063008. arxiv:1106.2425 . 
^ bardeen , james m. ; press , william h. ; teukolsky , saul a . 
( 1 december 1972 ) . 
rotating black holes : locally nonrotating frames , energy extraction , and scalar synchrotron radiation . 
the astrophysical journal . 
178 : 347–370 . 
^ black hole calculator . 
archived from the original on 21 october 2020 . 
retrieved 29 september 2020. . 
^ a b visser , matt ( 2007 ) . 
the kerr spacetime : a brief introduction . 
page 35 , fig . 
3. arxiv:0706.0622 [ gr-qc ] . 
^ carroll 2004 , ch . 
^ carroll 2004 , ch . 
^ misner , thorne & wheeler 1973 , box 25.6. . 
^ bardeen , j. m. ( 1972 ) . 
rotating black holes : locally nonrotating frames , energy extraction , and scalar synchrotron radiation . 
the astrophysical journal . 
178 : 347–370 . 
^ einstein , a . 
( 1939 ) . 
on a stationary system with spherical symmetry consisting of many gravitating masses ( pdf ) . 
annals of mathematics . 
40 ( 4 ) : 922–936 . 
archived from the original ( pdf ) on 28 february 2019. . 
^ kerr , r. p. ( 2009 ) . 
the kerr and kerr-schild metrics . 
in wiltshire , d. l. ; visser , m. ; scott , s. m . 
( eds . ) . 
the kerr spacetime . 
cambridge university press . 
^ findley , kate ( 27 december 2019 ) . 
the discovery of black holes : from theory to actuality . 
retrieved 29 june 2022. . 
^ hawking , s. w. ; penrose , r. ( january 1970 ) . 
the singularities of gravitational collapse and cosmology . 
proceedings of the royal society a . 
314 ( 1519 ) : 529–548 . 
^ a b c pacucci , f. ; ferrara , a. ; grazian , a. ; fiore , f. ; giallongo , e. ( 2016 ) . 
first identification of direct collapse black hole candidates in the early universe in candels/goods-s. mon . 
459 ( 2 ) : 1432. arxiv:1603.08522 . 
^ a b carr , b. j . 
( 2005 ) . 
primordial black holes : do they exist and are they useful ? . 
in suzuki , h. ; yokoyama , j. ; suto , y. ; sato , k . 
( eds . ) . 
inflating horizon of particle astrophysics and cosmology . 
universal academy press . 
pp . astro–ph/0511743 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0511743 . 
^ ripped apart by a black hole . 
eso press release . 
archived from the original on 21 july 2013 . 
retrieved 19 july 2013. . 
^ a b c carroll 2004 , section 5.8. . 
^ artists impression of supermassive black hole seed . 
archived from the original on 30 may 2016 . 
retrieved 27 may 2016. . 
^ a b c rees , m. j. ; volonteri , m. ( 2007 ) . 
karas , v. ; matt , g . 
( eds . ) . 
massive black holes : formation and evolution . 
proceedings of the international astronomical union . 
vol . 238 . 
pp . 51–58 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0701512 . 
^ bañados , eduardo ; venemans , bram p. ; mazzucchelli , chiara ; farina , emanuele p. ; walter , fabian ; wang , feige ; decarli , roberto ; stern , daniel ; fan , xiaohui ; davies , frederick b. ; hennawi , joseph f. ( 1 january 2018 ) . 
an 800-million-solar-mass black hole in a significantly neutral universe at a redshift of 7.5 . 
553 ( 7689 ) : 473–476 . 
^ penrose , r. ( 2002 ) . 
gravitational collapse : the role of general relativity ( pdf ) . 
general relativity and gravitation . 
34 ( 7 ) : 1141 . 
archived from the original ( pdf ) on 26 may 2013. . 
^ philip gibbs . 
is the big bang a black hole ? . 
archived from the original on 31 december 2018 . 
retrieved 16 march 2018. . 
^ giddings , s. b. ; thomas , s. ( 2002 ) . 
high energy colliders as black hole factories : the end of short distance physics . 
physical review d. 65 ( 5 ) : 056010. arxiv : hep-ph/0106219 . 
^ harada , t. ( 2006 ) . 
is there a black hole minimum mass ? . 
physical review d. 74 ( 8 ) : 084004. arxiv : gr-qc/0609055 . 
^ arkani–hamed , n. ; dimopoulos , s. ; dvali , g. ( 1998 ) . 
the hierarchy problem and new dimensions at a millimeter . 
physics letters b . 
429 ( 3–4 ) : 263–272 . 
arxiv : hep-ph/9803315 . 
doi:10.1016/s0370-2693 ( 98 ) 00466-3 . 
^ lhc safety assessment group ( 2008 ) . 
review of the safety of lhc collisions ( pdf ) . 
journal of physics g : nuclear physics . 
35 ( 11 ) : 115004. arxiv:0806.3414 . 
archived ( pdf ) from the original on 14 april 2010. . 
^ cavaglià , m. ( 2010 ) . 
particle accelerators as black hole factories ? . 
4 : 1010 . 
archived from the original on 8 may 2013 . 
retrieved 8 may 2013. . 
^ vesperini , e. ; mcmillan , s. l. w. ; dercole , a. ; et al . 
( 2010 ) . 
intermediate-mass black holes in early globular clusters . 
the astrophysical journal letters . 
713 ( 1 ) : l41–l44 . 
^ zwart , s. f. p. ; baumgardt , h. ; hut , p. ; et al . 
( 2004 ) . 
formation of massive black holes through runaway collisions in dense young star clusters . 
428 ( 6984 ) : 724–726 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0402622 . 
^ oleary , r. m. ; rasio , f. a. ; fregeau , j. m. ; et al . 
( 2006 ) . 
binary mergers and growth of black holes in dense star clusters . 
the astrophysical journal . 
637 ( 2 ) : 937–951 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0508224 . 
^ page , d. n. ( 2005 ) . 
hawking radiation and black hole thermodynamics . 
new journal of physics . 
7 ( 1 ) : 203. arxiv : hep-th/0409024 . 
^ carroll 2004 , ch . 
^ siegel , ethan ( 2017 ) . 
ask ethan : do black holes grow faster than they evaporate ? . 
forbes ( starts with a bang blog ) . 
archived from the original on 22 november 2018 . 
retrieved 17 march 2018. . 
^ sivaram , c. ( 2001 ) . 
black hole hawking radiation may never be observed ! . 
general relativity and gravitation . 
33 ( 2 ) : 175–181 . 
^ evaporating black holes ? . 
max planck institute for gravitational physics . 
archived from the original on 22 july 2011 . 
retrieved 12 december 2010. . 
^ giddings , s. b. ; mangano , m. l. ( 2008 ) . 
astrophysical implications of hypothetical stable tev-scale black holes . 
physical review d. 78 ( 3 ) : 035009. arxiv:0806.3381 . 
^ peskin , m. e. ( 2008 ) . 
the end of the world at the large hadron collider ? . 
1 : 14 . 
^ fichtel , c. e. ; bertsch , d. l. ; dingus , b. l. ; et al . 
( 1994 ) . 
search of the energetic gamma-ray experiment telescope ( egret ) data for high-energy gamma-ray microsecond bursts . 
434 ( 2 ) : 557–559 . 
^ naeye , r. testing fundamental physics . 
archived from the original on 31 august 2008 . 
retrieved 16 september 2008. . 
^ a b frautschi , s. ( 1982 ) . 
entropy in an expanding universe . 
217 ( 4560 ) : 593–599 . 
see page 596 : table 1 and section black hole decay and previous sentence on that page . 
^ page , don n. ( 1976 ) . 
particle emission rates from a black hole : massless particles from an uncharged , nonrotating hole . 
physical review d. 13 ( 2 ) : 198–206 . 
see in particular equation ( 27 ) . 
^ black holes | science mission directorate . 
archived from the original on 17 november 2017 . 
retrieved 17 march 2018. . 
^ falcke , heino ; melia , fulvio ; agol , eric ( 1 january 2000 ) . 
viewing the shadow of the black hole at the galactic center . 
the astrophysical journal . 
528 ( 1 ) : l13–l16 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/9912263 . 
archived from the original on 23 october 2020 . 
retrieved 22 october 2020. . 
^ april 2017 observations . 
event horizon telescope . 
archived from the original on 10 april 2019 . 
retrieved 11 april 2019. . 
^ overbye , dennis ( 10 april 2019 ) . 
darkness visible , finally : astronomers capture first ever image of a black hole . 
the new york times . 
archived from the original on 21 may 2019 . 
retrieved 11 april 2019. . 
^ ap ( 10 april 2019 ) . 
astronomers reveal the first picture of a black hole . 
the new york times ( video ) . 
archived from the original on 22 may 2019 . 
retrieved 11 april 2019. . 
^ doeleman , shep ( 4 april 2016 ) . 
the event horizon telescope : imaging and time-resolving a black hole . 
physics @ berkeley . 
event occurs at 46:50 . 
archived from the original on 1 december 2016 . 
retrieved 8 july 2016. . 
^ grossman , lisa ; conover , emily ( 10 april 2019 ) . 
the first picture of a black hole opens a new era of astrophysics . 
archived from the original on 27 april 2019 . 
retrieved 11 april 2019. . 
^ this article incorporates text available under the cc by 4.0 license . 
astronomers reveal first image of the black hole at the heart of our galaxy . 
retrieved 22 june 2022. . 
^ c. bower , geoffrey ( may 2022 ) . 
focus on first sgr a * results from the event horizon telescope . 
the astrophysical journal letters ( 2041–8205 ) . 
^ event horizon telescope collaboration ( 2021 ) . 
first m87 event horizon telescope results . 
polarization of the ring . 
the astrophysical journal . 
910 ( 1 ) : l12 . 
archived from the original on 20 april 2021 . 
retrieved 18 april 2021. . 
^ the first picture of a black hole opens a new era of astrophysics . 
10 april 2019 . 
archived from the original on 27 april 2019 . 
retrieved 30 september 2019. . 
^ johnson , m. d. ; fish , v. l. ; doeleman , s. s. ; marrone , d. p. ; plambeck , r. l. ; wardle , j. f. c. ; akiyama , k. ; asada , k. ; beaudoin , c. ( 4 december 2015 ) . 
resolved magnetic-field structure and variability near the event horizon of sagittarius a * . 
350 ( 6265 ) : 1242–1245 . 
^ event horizon telescope reveals magnetic fields at milky ways central black hole . 
3 december 2015 . 
archived from the original on 31 december 2015 . 
retrieved 12 january 2016. . 
^ o. straub , f.h . 
vincent , m.a . 
abramowicz , e. gourgoulhon , t. paumard , modelling the black hole silhouette in sgr a * with ion tori , astron . 
astroph 543 ( 2012 ) a8 . 
^ overbye , dennis ( 11 february 2016 ) . 
physicists detect gravitational waves , proving einstein right . 
the new york times . 
archived from the original on 11 february 2016 . 
retrieved 11 february 2016. . 
^ abbott , benjamin p. ; et al . 
( ligo scientific collaboration & virgo collaboration ) ( 11 february 2016 ) . 
properties of the binary black hole merger gw150914 . 
physical review letters . 
116 ( 24 ) : 241102. arxiv:1602.03840 . 
^ a b cardoso , v. ; franzin , e. ; pani , p. ( 2016 ) . 
is the gravitational-wave ringdown a probe of the event horizon ? . 
physical review letters . 
116 ( 17 ) : 171101. arxiv:1602.07309 . 
^ abbott , benjamin p. ; et al . 
( ligo scientific collaboration & virgo collaboration ) ( 11 february 2016 ) . 
tests of general relativity with gw150914 . 
physical review letters . 
116 ( 22 ) : 221101. arxiv:1602.03841 . 
archived from the original on 15 february 2016 . 
retrieved 12 february 2016. . 
^ abbott , b. p. ; et al . 
( ligo scientific collaboration & virgo collaboration ) ( 2016 ) . 
astrophysical implications of the binary black hole merger gw150914 . 
818 ( 2 ) : l22 . 
archived from the original on 16 march 2016. . 
^ detection of gravitational waves . 
archived from the original on 20 may 2020 . 
retrieved 9 april 2018. . 
^ a b gillessen , s. ; eisenhauer , f. ; trippe , s. ; et al . 
( 2009 ) . 
monitoring stellar orbits around the massive black hole in the galactic center . 
the astrophysical journal . 
692 ( 2 ) : 1075–1109 . 
^ a b ghez , a. m. ; klein , b. l. ; morris , m. ; et al . 
( 1998 ) . 
high proper‐motion stars in the vicinity of sagittarius a * : evidence for a supermassive black hole at the center of our galaxy . 
the astrophysical journal . 
509 ( 2 ) : 678–686 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/9807210 . 
^ broderick , avery ; loeb , abraham ; narayan , ramesh ( august 2009 ) . 
the event horizon of sagittarius a * . 
the astrophysical journal . 
701 ( 2 ) : 1357–1366 . 
^ a b nasas nustar sees rare blurring of black hole light . 
12 august 2014 . 
archived from the original on 13 august 2014 . 
retrieved 12 august 2014. . 
^ researchers clarify dynamics of black hole rotational energy . 
archived from the original on 17 september 2018 . 
retrieved 17 september 2018. . 
^ marck , jean-alain ( 1 march 1996 ) . 
short-cut method of solution of geodesic equations for schwarzchild black hole . 
classical and quantum gravity . 
13 ( 3 ) : 393–402 . 
arxiv : gr-qc/9505010 . 
^ a b mcclintock , j. e. ; remillard , r. a . 
( 2006 ) . 
black hole binaries . 
in lewin , w. ; van der klis , m . 
( eds . ) . 
compact stellar x-ray sources . 
p. 157. arxiv : astro-ph/0306213 . 
isbn 978-0-521-82659-4. section 4.1.5. . 
^ what powers a black holes mighty jets ? . 
science | aaas . 
19 november 2014 . 
archived from the original on 5 may 2019 . 
retrieved 19 march 2018. . 
^ a b c d e f g h i celotti , a. ; miller , j. c. ; sciama , d. w. ( 1999 ) . 
astrophysical evidence for the existence of black holes ( pdf ) . 
classical and quantum gravity . 
16 ( 12a ) : a3–a21 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/9912186 . 
archived ( pdf ) from the original on 27 july 2018 . 
retrieved 27 july 2018. . 
^ winter , l. m. ; mushotzky , r. f. ; reynolds , c. s. ( 2006 ) . 
xmm‐newton archival study of the ultraluminous x‐ray population in nearby galaxies . 
the astrophysical journal . 
649 ( 2 ) : 730–752 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0512480 . 
^ information @ eso.org . 
hubble directly observes the disk around a black hole . 
archived from the original on 8 march 2016 . 
retrieved 7 march 2016. . 
^ muñoz , josé a. ; mediavilla , evencio ; kochanek , christopher s. ; falco , emilio ; mosquera , ana maría ( 1 december 2011 ) . 
a study of gravitational lens chromaticity with the hubble space telescope . 
the astrophysical journal . 
742 ( 2 ) : 67. arxiv:1107.5932 . 
^ bolton , c. t. ( 1972 ) . 
identification of cygnus x-1 with hde 226868 . 
235 ( 5336 ) : 271–273 . 
^ webster , b. l. ; murdin , p. ( 1972 ) . 
cygnus x-1 – a spectroscopic binary with a heavy companion ? . 
235 ( 5332 ) : 37–38 . 
^ rolston , b . 
( 10 november 1997 ) . 
the first black hole . 
university of toronto . 
archived from the original on 2 may 2008 . 
retrieved 11 march 2008. . 
^ shipman , h. l. ( 1 january 1975 ) . 
the implausible history of triple star models for cygnus x-1 evidence for a black hole . 
16 ( 1 ) : 9–12 . 
^ nasa scientists identify smallest known black hole ( press release ) . 
goddard space flight center . 
1 april 2008 . 
archived from the original on 27 december 2008 . 
retrieved 14 march 2009. . 
^ krolik , j. h. ( 1999 ) . 
active galactic nuclei . 
princeton university press . 
archived from the original on 14 august 2021 . 
retrieved 16 october 2020. . 
^ sparke , l. s. ; gallagher , j. s. ( 2000 ) . 
galaxies in the universe : an introduction . 
cambridge university press . 
archived from the original on 22 march 2022 . 
retrieved 16 october 2020. . 
^ chou , felicia ; anderson , janet ; watzke , megan ( 5 january 2015 ) . 
release 15-001 – nasas chandra detects record-breaking outburst from milky ways black hole . 
archived from the original on 6 january 2015 . 
retrieved 6 january 2015. . 
^ kormendy , j. ; richstone , d. ( 1995 ) . 
inward bound – the search for supermassive black holes in galactic nuclei . 
annual review of astronomy and astrophysics . 
33 ( 1 ) : 581–624 . 
bibcode:1995ara & a.33.581k . 
^ king , a . 
( 2003 ) . 
black holes , galaxy formation , and the mbh-σ relation . 
the astrophysical journal letters . 
596 ( 1 ) : 27–29 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0308342 . 
^ ferrarese , l. ; merritt , d. ( 2000 ) . 
a fundamental relation between supermassive black holes and their host galaxies . 
the astrophysical journal letters . 
539 ( 1 ) : 9–12 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0006053 . 
^ a black holes dinner is fast approaching . 
eso press release . 
archived from the original on 13 february 2012 . 
retrieved 6 february 2012. . 
^ sahu , k. c. ( 2022 ) . 
an isolated stellar-mass black hole detected through astrometric microlensing . 
933 ( 1 ) : 83. arxiv:2201.13296 . 
^ bozza , v. ( 2010 ) . 
gravitational lensing by black holes . 
general relativity and gravitation . 
42 ( 9 ) : 2269–2300 . 
^ kovacs , z. ; cheng , k. s. ; harko , t. ( 2009 ) . 
can stellar mass black holes be quark stars ? . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
400 ( 3 ) : 1632–1642 . 
^ kusenko , a . 
( 2006 ) . 
properties and signatures of supersymmetric q-balls . 
arxiv : hep-ph/0612159 . 
^ hansson , j. ; sandin , f. ( 2005 ) . 
preon stars : a new class of cosmic compact objects . 
physics letters b . 
616 ( 1–2 ) : 1–7 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0410417 . 
^ kiefer , c. ( 2006 ) . 
quantum gravity : general introduction and recent developments . 
annalen der physik . 
15 ( 1–2 ) : 129–148 . 
arxiv : gr-qc/0508120 . 
^ skenderis , k. ; taylor , m. ( 2008 ) . 
the fuzzball proposal for black holes . 
467 ( 4–5 ) : 117. arxiv:0804.0552 . 
^ choi , charles q . 
( 2018 ) . 
black hole pretenders could really be bizarre quantum stars . 
archived from the original on 17 june 2019 . 
retrieved 17 march 2018. . 
^ ball , philip ( 31 march 2005 ) . 
black holes do not exist . 
^ hawking , s. w. ( 1971 ) . 
gravitational radiation from colliding black holes . 
physical review letters . 
26 ( 21 ) : 1344–1346 . 
^ a b wald , r. m. ( 2001 ) . 
the thermodynamics of black holes . 
living reviews in relativity . 
4 ( 1 ) : 6. arxiv : gr-qc/9912119 . 
^ t hooft , g. ( 2001 ) . 
the holographic principle . 
in zichichi , a . 
( ed . ) . 
basics and highlights in fundamental physics . 
proceedings of the international school of subnuclear physics . 
vol . 37 . 
world scientific publishing . 
pp . 72–100 . 
arxiv : hep-th/0003004 . 
^ strominger , a. ; vafa , c. ( 1996 ) . 
microscopic origin of the bekenstein-hawking entropy . 
physics letters b . 
379 ( 1–4 ) : 99–104 . 
arxiv : hep-th/9601029 . 
doi:10.1016/0370-2693 ( 96 ) 00345-0 . 
^ carlip , s. ( 2009 ) . 
black hole thermodynamics and statistical mechanics . 
physics of black holes . 
physics of black holes . 
lecture notes in physics . 
vol . 769 . 
berlin , heidelberg . 
pp . 89–123 . 
^ calmet , kuipers , xavier , folkert ( 2021 ) . 
quantum gravitational corrections to the entropy of a schwarzschild black hole . 
d. 104 ( 6 ) : 6. arxiv:2108.06824 . 
^ campos delgado , ruben ( 2022 ) . 
quantum gravitational corrections to the entropy of a reissner-nordström black hole . 
j. c. 82 ( 3 ) : 272 . 
^ hawking , s. w. does god play dice ? . 
archived from the original on 11 january 2012 . 
retrieved 14 march 2009. . 
^ giddings , s. b . 
( 1995 ) . 
the black hole information paradox . 
particles , strings and cosmology . 
johns hopkins workshop on current problems in particle theory 19 and the pascos interdisciplinary symposium 5. arxiv : hep-th/9508151 . 
^ a b unruh , william g. ; wald , robert m. ( 2017 ) . 
reports on progress in physics . 
80 ( 9 ) : 092002. arxiv:1703.02140 . 
^ mathur , s. d. ( 2011 ) . 
the information paradox : conflicts and resolutions . 
xxv international symposium on lepton photon interactions at high energies . 
79 , no . 5 . 
pp . 1059–1073 . 
^ page , don n. ( 1993 ) . 
information in black hole radiation . 
71 ( 23 ) : 3743–3746 . 
arxiv : hep-th/9306083 . 
citeseerx 10.1.1.267.174. doi:10.1103/physrevlett.71.3743 . 
^ page , don n. ( 1993 ) . 
average entropy of a subsystem . 
71 ( 9 ) : 1291–1294 . 
arxiv : gr-qc/9305007 . 
citeseerx 10.1.1.339.7694. doi:10.1103/physrevlett.71.1291 . 
^ merali , zeeya ( 3 april 2013 ) . 
astrophysics : fire in the hole ! . 
496 ( 7443 ) : 20–23 . 
^ amheiri , ahmed ; marolf , donald ; polchinski , joseph ; sully , james ( 2013 ) . 
black holes : complementarity or firewalls ? . 
journal of high energy physics . 
2013 ( 2 ) : 62. arxiv:1207.3123 . 
doi:10.1007/jhep02 ( 2013 ) 062 . 
begelman , mitchell ; rees , martin ( 2021 ) . 
gravitys fatal attraction : black holes in the universe ( third ed . ) . 
new york : cambridge university press . 
archived from the original on 2 january 2022 . 
retrieved 6 november 2021 . 
ferguson , kitty ( 1991 ) . 
black holes in space-time . 
hawking , stephen ( 1988 ) . 
a brief history of time . 
bantam books , inc. isbn 978-0-553-38016-3 . 
hawking , stephen ; penrose , roger ( 1996 ) . 
the nature of space and time . 
princeton university press . 
archived from the original on 18 october 2021 . 
retrieved 16 may 2020 . 
levin , janna ( 2020 ) . 
black hole survival guide . 
new york : alfred a. knopf . 
archived from the original on 22 march 2022 . 
retrieved 6 november 2021 . 
melia , fulvio ( 2003 ) . 
the black hole at the center of our galaxy . 
princeton u press . 
melia , fulvio ( 2003 ) . 
the edge of infinity . 
supermassive black holes in the universe . 
cambridge u press . 
pickover , clifford ( 1998 ) . 
black holes : a travelers guide . 
wiley , john & sons , inc. isbn 978-0-471-19704-1 . 
thorne , kip s. ( 1994 ) . 
black holes and time warps . 
norton , w. w. & company , inc. isbn 978-0-393-31276-8 . 
susskind , leonard ( 2008 ) . 
the black hole war : my battle with stephen hawking to make the world safe for quantum mechanics . 
little , brown and company . 
wheeler , j. craig ( 2007 ) . 
cosmic catastrophes ( 2nd ed . ) . 
cambridge university press . 
university textbooks and monographs . 
carroll , sean m. ( 2004 ) . 
spacetime and geometry . 
isbn 978-0-8053-8732-2. , the lecture notes on which the book was based are available for free from sean carrolls website archived 23 march 2017 at the wayback machine . 
carter , b . 
( 1973 ) . 
black hole equilibrium states . 
in dewitt , b. s. ; dewitt , c . 
( eds . ) . 
chandrasekhar , subrahmanyan ( 1999 ) . 
mathematical theory of black holes . 
oxford university press . 
frolov , valeri p. ; novikov , igor d. ( 1998 ) . 
black hole physics . 
fundamental theories of physics . 
vol . 96 . 
frolov , valeri p. ; zelnikov , andrei ( 2011 ) . 
introduction to black hole physics . 
oxford : oxford university press . 
archived from the original on 22 march 2022 . 
retrieved 2 january 2022 . 
hawking , s. w. ; ellis , g. f. r. ( 1973 ) . 
large scale structure of space time . 
cambridge university press . 
archived from the original on 21 july 2020 . 
retrieved 16 may 2020 . 
melia , fulvio ( 2007 ) . 
the galactic supermassive black hole . 
princeton u press . 
misner , charles ; thorne , kip s. ; wheeler , john ( 1973 ) . 
w. h. freeman and company . 
taylor , edwin f. ; wheeler , john archibald ( 2000 ) . 
exploring black holes . 
addison wesley longman . 
wald , robert m. ( 1984 ) . 
university of chicago press . 
archived from the original on 11 august 2016 . 
retrieved 23 february 2016 . 
wald , robert m. ( 1992 ) . 
space , time , and gravity : the theory of the big bang and black holes . 
university of chicago press . 
price , richard ; creighton , teviet ( 2008 ) . 
3 ( 1 ) : 4277 . 
gallo , elena ; marolf , donald ( 2009 ) . 
resource letter bh-2 : black holes . 
american journal of physics . 
77 ( 4 ) : 294–307 . 
hughes , scott a . 
( 2005 ) . 
trust but verify : the case for astrophysical black holes . 
arxiv : hep-ph/0511217 . 
lecture notes from 2005 slac summer institute . 
black hole at wikipedias sister projects . 
definitions from wiktionarymedia from commonsnews from wikinewsquotations from wikiquotetextbooks from wikibooksresources from wikiversitydata from wikidata . 
scholia has a profile for black hole ( q589 ) . 
black holes on in our time at the bbc . 
stanford encyclopedia of philosophy : singularities and black holes by erik curiel and peter bokulich . 
black holes : gravitys relentless pull – interactive multimedia web site about the physics and astronomy of black holes from the space telescope science institute ( hubblesite ) . 
esas black hole visualization archived 3 may 2019 at the wayback machine . 
frequently asked questions ( faqs ) on black holes . 
black holes - basic ( nyt ; april 2021 ) . 
16-year-long study tracks stars orbiting sagittarius a * . 
movie of black hole candidate from max planck institute . 
cowen , ron ( 20 april 2015 ) . 
3d simulations of colliding black holes hailed as most realistic yet . 
computer visualisation of the signal detected by ligo . 
two black holes merge into one ( based upon the signal gw150914 ) . 
btz black hole . 
active galactic nucleus . 
binary black hole . 
dark matter star . 
innermost stable circular orbit . 
boussos holographic bound . 
black hole complementarity . 
er = epr . 
final parsec problem . 
firewall ( physics ) . 
schwarzschild ( derivation ) . 
nonsingular black hole models . 
magnetospheric eternally collapsing object . 
optical black hole . 
sonic black hole . 
outline of black holes . 
black hole initiative . 
black hole starship . 
gamma-ray burst progenitors . 
hypercompact stellar system . 
rossi x-ray timing explorer . 
timeline of black hole physics . 
tidal disruption event . 
sagittarius a * . 
centaurus a. phoenix cluster . 
principle of relativity ( galilean relativity . 
galilean transformation ) . 
doubly special relativity . 
frame of reference . 
speed of light . 
relativity of simultaneity . 
relativistic doppler effect . 
einstein field equations . 
gravitational waves : astronomy . 
detectors ( ligo and collaboration . 
other tests : precession of mercury . 
lensing ( together with einstein cross and einstein rings ) . 
frame-dragging / geodetic effect ( lense–thirring precession ) . 
pulsar timing arrays . 
cosmological : friedmann–lemaître–robertson–walker ( friedmann equations ) . 
spherical : schwarzschild ( interior . 
tolman–oppenheimer–volkoff equation ) . 
axisymmetric : kerr ( kerr–newman ) . 
van stockum dust . 
others : pp-wave . 
in computational physics : numerical relativity . 
history of string theory . 
first superstring revolution . 
second superstring revolution . 
string theory landscape . 
bosonic string theory . 
type i string . 
type ii string . 
type iia string . 
type iib string . 
string field theory . 
matrix string theory . 
non-critical string theory . 
non-linear sigma model . 
particles and fields . 
conformal field theory . 
vertex operator algebra . 
exceptional lie groups ( g2 , f4 , e6 , e7 , e8 ) . 
why 10 dimensions ? . 
spin ( 7 ) -manifold . 
generalized complex manifold . 
k-theory ( physics ) . 
introduction to m-theory . 
portals : astronomy history of science mathematics physics stars . 
authority control national libraries . 
france ( data ) . 
sudoc ( france ) . 
retrieved from https : //en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php ? title=black_hole & oldid=1136440665 . 
categories : black holesgalaxiestheory of relativityconcepts in astronomyhidden categories : webarchive template wayback linksarticles with imported freely licensed textarticles with short descriptionshort description is different from wikidatawikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesuse dmy dates from march 2021articles containing potentially dated statements from 2021all articles containing potentially dated statementsall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from march 2018wikipedia articles needing clarification from february 2016pages using sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatchpages using sister project links with hidden wikidataarticles with bne identifiersarticles with bnf identifiersarticles with gnd identifiersarticles with j9u identifiersarticles with lccn identifiersarticles with ndl identifiersarticles with nkc identifiersarticles with sudoc identifiersgood articlesarticles containing video clips . 
this page was last edited on 30 january 2023 , at 09:09 ( utc ) . 
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license 3.0 ; . 
additional terms may apply . 
by using this site , you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy . 
wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation , inc. , a non-profit organization . 
magnetic fields may muzzle milky ways monster black hole | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingmeteorite from european fireball ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
magnetic fields may muzzle milky ways monster black hole . 
by nola taylor tillman published 14 june 2019 . 
magnetic fields may keep the milky ways supermassive black hole quiet . 
in this image , streamlines showing magnetic fields overlay a color image of the dusty ring surrounding the milky ways supermassive black hole . 
warm material falling toward the black hole creates a y-shaped structure , with the black hole lying near the intersection of the two arms . 
( image credit : dust and magnetic fields : nasa/sofia ; star field image : nasa/hubble space telescope ) . 
magnetic forces may explain why the supermassive black hole at the heart of the milky way is so much quieter than its counterparts in other galaxies . 
new observations , taken by nasas stratospheric observatory for infrared astronomy ( sofia ) mission , reveal unprecedented information about the strong magnetic field lines at the center of the galaxy.the strong gravitational pull of the milky ways central black hole , which is known as sagittarius a * , dominates the heart of the galaxy . 
in general , as material falls into black holes , the dark giants emit high-energy radiation that reveals their presence . 
compared to black holes seen in other galaxies , however , the milky ways heart is relatively quiet , emitting far less radiation than expected . 
understanding how black holes interact with their magnetic fields can help scientists understand the difference between active and quiet black holes.related : images : black holes of the universewhether they exist around refrigerator magnets or black holes , magnetic fields are invisible . 
to study the ones connected to sagittarius a * , researchers relied on sofia , which is a modified boeing 747sp aircraft . 
specifically , they employed sofias newest instrument , the high-resolution airborne wideband camera-plus ( hawc+ ) , to track polarized far-infrared light emitted by dust particles . 
because dust grains line up perpendicular to magnetic fields , astronomers were able to map the shape and infer the strength of the magnetic field around the black hole . 
combining the new map with mid- and far-infrared images of sagittarius a * revealed the direction of the magnetic field . 
while some of the material from the surrounding ring of gas and dust is falling toward the black hole , the magnetic field also directs material away from the hungry giant , researchers said.the spiral shape of the magnetic field channels the gas into an orbit around the black hole , hawc+ principal investigator darren dowell , of nasas jet propulsion laboratory in pasadena , california , said in a statement . 
this could explain why our black hole is quiet while others are active , added dowell , lead author of a new study reporting the sofia results.sagittarius a * is the closest supermassive black hole to the sun and therefore provides a good opportunity to learn how the mysterious giants function.this is one of the first instances where we can really see how magnetic fields and interstellar matter interact with each other , said study co-author joan schmelz , an astrophysicist at nasa ames research center in california . 
hawc+ is a game-changer.the results were presented at the 234th semiannual meeting of the american astronomical society , which was held this week in st. louis.photos from sofia , nasas flying telescope ( gallery ) black hole quiz : how well do you know natures weirdest creations ? our milky way galaxy : a travelers guide ( infographic ) follow nola on facebook and on twitter at @ nolatredd . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
nola taylor tillmansocial links navigationcontributing writernola taylor tillman is a contributing writer for space.com . 
she loves all things space and astronomy-related , and enjoys the opportunity to learn more . 
she has a bachelor ’ s degree in english and astrophysics from agnes scott college and served as an intern at sky & telescope magazine . 
in her free time , she homeschools her four children . 
follow her on twitter at @ nolatredd . 
more from space.1japans new h3 rocket aborts 1st-ever launch attempt2virgin galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202133 mystery objects shot down by us likely werent spy craft , biden says4black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy5pictures from space ! 
our image of the day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
black holes | science mission directorate . 
skip to main content . 
nasa science mission directorate . 
share the science . 
ask a question . 
science topicsuniversesolar systemsunearthspace experimentsmissionsscience-enabling technologylunar discovery and explorationscience activationnewsscience @ nasapress releaseswatchsciencecastswe asked a nasa expertnasa science liveez sciencefor researchersoverviewfaqsolicitationssmd bridge programroses blognac science committeenasa postdoc programteampi resourcesscience datahelp & supportsuborbital programuaplearnersoverviewteamsresourcessme mapopportunitiesnewshighlightshotlinespace placeget involvednasa science at homeart and scienceupcoming eventsconnectemail sign upfollow usresourcestoolkitsvisual presentations citizen scienceprojectshighlightspublicationsnasa citizen scientistsabout usoverviewleadershippeopleresourcesscience strategyworkforce initiativescareersideaconnectcommunicationscontact usespañolscience in spanish . 
learn more about this image . 
what we study . 
what we study . 
dark energy , dark matter . 
the big bang . 
dont let the name fool you : a black hole is anything but empty space . 
rather , it is a great amount of matter packed into a very small area - think of a star ten times more massive than the sun squeezed into a sphere approximately the diameter of new york city . 
the result is a gravitational field so strong that nothing , not even light , can escape . 
in recent years , nasa instruments have painted a new picture of these strange objects that are , to many , the most fascinating objects in space . 
intense x-ray flares thought to be caused by a black hole devouring a star . 
( video ) . 
watch the video . 
the idea of an object in space so massive and dense that light could not escape it has been around for centuries . 
most famously , black holes were predicted by einsteins theory of general relativity , which showed that when a massive star dies , it leaves behind a small , dense remnant core . 
if the cores mass is more than about three times the mass of the sun , the equations showed , the force of gravity overwhelms all other forces and produces a black hole . 
a video about black holes . 
watch the video . 
scientists cant directly observe black holes with telescopes that detect x-rays , light , or other forms of electromagnetic radiation . 
we can , however , infer the presence of black holes and study them by detecting their effect on other matter nearby . 
if a black hole passes through a cloud of interstellar matter , for example , it will draw matter inward in a process known as accretion . 
a similar process can occur if a normal star passes close to a black hole . 
in this case , the black hole can tear the star apart as it pulls it toward itself . 
as the attracted matter accelerates and heats up , it emits x-rays that radiate into space . 
recent discoveries offer some tantalizing evidence that black holes have a dramatic influence on the neighborhoods around them - emitting powerful gamma ray bursts , devouring nearby stars , and spurring the growth of new stars in some areas while stalling it in others . 
one stars end is a black holes beginning . 
most black holes form from the remnants of a large star that dies in a supernova explosion . 
( smaller stars become dense neutron stars , which are not massive enough to trap light . ) 
if the total mass of the star is large enough ( about three times the mass of the sun ) , it can be proven theoretically that no force can keep the star from collapsing under the influence of gravity . 
however , as the star collapses , a strange thing occurs . 
as the surface of the star nears an imaginary surface called the event horizon , time on the star slows relative to the time kept by observers far away . 
when the surface reaches the event horizon , time stands still , and the star can collapse no more - it is a frozen collapsing object . 
astronomers have identified a candidate for the smallest-known black hole . 
( video ) . 
watch the video . 
even bigger black holes can result from stellar collisions . 
soon after its launch in december 2004 , nasas swift telescope observed the powerful , fleeting flashes of light known as gamma ray bursts . 
chandra and nasas hubble space telescope later collected data from the events afterglow , and together the observations led astronomers to conclude that the powerful explosions can result when a black hole and a neutron star collide , producing another black hole . 
babies and giants . 
although the basic formation process is understood , one perennial mystery in the science of black holes is that they appear to exist on two radically different size scales . 
on the one end , there are the countless black holes that are the remnants of massive stars . 
peppered throughout the universe , these stellar mass black holes are generally 10 to 24 times as massive as the sun . 
astronomers spot them when another star draws near enough for some of the matter surrounding it to be snared by the black holes gravity , churning out x-rays in the process . 
most stellar black holes , however , are very difficult to detect . 
judging from the number of stars large enough to produce such black holes , however , scientists estimate that there are as many as ten million to a billion such black holes in the milky way alone . 
on the other end of the size spectrum are the giants known as supermassive black holes , which are millions , if not billions , of times as massive as the sun . 
astronomers believe that supermassive black holes lie at the center of virtually all large galaxies , even our own milky way . 
astronomers can detect them by watching for their effects on nearby stars and gas . 
this chart shows the relative masses of super-dense cosmic objects . 
read the full article . 
historically , astronomers have long believed that no mid-sized black holes exist . 
however , recent evidence from chandra , xmm-newton and hubble strengthens the case that mid-size black holes do exist . 
one possible mechanism for the formation of supermassive black holes involves a chain reaction of collisions of stars in compact star clusters that results in the buildup of extremely massive stars , which then collapse to form intermediate-mass black holes . 
the star clusters then sink to the center of the galaxy , where the intermediate-mass black holes merge to form a supermassive black hole . 
december 20 , 2022 . 
nasa gets unusual close glimpse of black hole snacking on star . 
november 23 , 2022 . 
ixpe helps solve black hole jet mystery . 
november 21 , 2022 . 
listen to the light echoes from a black hole . 
november 10 , 2022 . 
magnetic fields help black holes reach deeper into galaxies . 
november 3 , 2022 . 
ixpe reveals shape , orientation of hot matter around black hole . 
october 13 , 2022 . 
swift , fermi missions detect exceptional cosmic blast . 
august 18 , 2022 . 
nasa telescopes capture stellar delivery service for black hole ( ngc 4424 ) . 
june 30 , 2022 . 
chandra shows giant black hole spins slower than its peers ( h1821+243 ) . 
june 10 , 2022 . 
hubble determines mass of isolated black hole roaming our milky way galaxy . 
may 12 , 2022 . 
nasa telescopes support event horizon telescope in studying milky ways black hole ( sagittarius a * ) . 
may 5 , 2022 . 
swift tracks potential magnetic flip of monster black hole . 
may 4 , 2022 . 
new nasa black hole sonifications with a remix . 
april 20 , 2022 . 
black holes raze thousands of stars to fuel growth . 
april 13 , 2022 . 
hubble sheds light on origins of supermassive black holes . 
april 7 , 2022 . 
fermi hunts for gravitational waves from monster black holes . 
march 31 , 2022 . 
feasting black holes caught in galactic spiderweb ( spiderweb galaxy field ) . 
february 22 , 2022 . 
how magnetic fields help feed a supermassive black hole . 
january 19 , 2022 . 
hubble finds a black hole igniting star formation in a dwarf galaxy . 
january 10 , 2022 . 
mini monster black hole could hold clues to giants growth ( mrk 462 ) . 
december 16 , 2021 . 
astronomers spy quartet of cavities from giant black holes : rbs 797 . 
december 9 , 2021 . 
mini-jet found near milky ways supermassive black hole . 
november 10 , 2021 . 
black holes can tell us the expansion rate of the universe . 
september 16 , 2021 . 
jingle , pluck , and hum : sounds from space . 
august 5 , 2021 . 
huge rings around a black hole ( v404 cygni ) . 
what we study . 
dark energy , dark matterblack holesthe big banggalaxiesstarsexoplanets . 
organization and staff 2020 decadal survey2022 senior review of operating missionsastrophysics fleet mission chart ( pdf ) astronomy picture of the daynight sky networkspacecraft paper models . 
field guide to black holesblack holes : gravitys relentless pullblack hole fact sheet and morelisten to a black hole . 
are we alone in the universe ? 
you ’ re . 
february 14 , 2023 . 
volunteers help discover the reddest . 
february 07 , 2023 . 
the scigirls become disk detectives . 
february 02 , 2023 . 
nasa wants you to help study planets . 
january 11 , 2023 . 
science newsscience at nasa . 
we asked a nasa expert . 
nac science committee . 
nasa postdoc program . 
help & support . 
get involvednasa science at home . 
art and science . 
email sign up . 
nasa citizen scientists . 
nasa official : dana bolles . 
last updated : february 17 , 2023 . 
ask a question . 
science topicsuniverseoverview2020 decadal surveyapd responses to decadalpre 2020 decadal reportslarge missionsprobe missionswhat we studydark energy , dark matterblack holesthe big banggalaxiesstarsexoplanetsprogramsphysics of the cosmoscosmic originsastrophysics explorersexoplanet explorationastrophysics researchastrophysics div technologyastrophysics pioneersmissionsscience questionshow does the universe work ? how did we get here ? are we alone ? astro dataheasarcmastnexscinedirsasimbadadsdocumentsastrophysics roadmapmeeting of expertssolar systemoverviewwhat we studyinner solar systemouter solar systemsmall bodies of the solar systemprogramsdiscoverylunar discovery & explorationmars explorationnew frontiersplanetary defense coordination officeouter planets & ocean worldssmall satssservimissionsscience questionshow did life begin and evolve on earth ? how did the solar system evolve ? how did the suns family originate ? what are the characteristics of the solar system ? documentsplanetary dataoverviewpde elementspde irbstatus updatesarchives/repositoriesopportunitiestraining toolkitsolar systemsunoverviewheliophysics leadershiphelio org chartsmd organization chartprogram officers listwhat we studyprogramsheliophysics researchballoonscubesatssolar terrestrial probesexplorersliving with a starsounding rocketsworking groupscitizen sciencetechnology programchimera : a hybrid search coil and fluxgate magnetometer for small spacecraft missionssolar cruiser : enabling new vistas for heliophysics sciencemissionsspace weatherspace weather strategyspace weather councilgap analysis reportsupplemental informationheliophysics 2024 decadal survey2050 workshopstrategic mission programshelio dataresourcesgeospace dynamics constellationdocuments and reportsmembershippublic commentsearthoverviewwhat we studyelementsflight programresearch and analysis programatmospheric compositionac missionsweatherwad missionsweather and atmospheric dynamics focus area publications and research highlightsour climateoceanographycvc missionsclimate variability & changeel niñoglobal water & energy cyclewec missionscarbon cycle & ecosystemscce missionscarbon cycle and ecosystems focus area publications and research highlightsour surfacea year in review : new earth discoveries in 2018accounting for internal variabilitychanges in global terrestrial water storage cclimate change changing ensoclimate change is speeding up the water cyclecold-intolerant plants are creeping farther northice losses from antarctica have tripled since 2012india overtakes china as top emitter of sulfur dioxidelinking ocean circulation and riverine carbon fluxlocal land subsidence increases flood risk in san francisco baysatellites detect undiscovered penguin populationssea surface salinity could provide new insight into severe stormsseeing the connection between neighboring volcanoes at depthwarm ocean waters off greenland put glaciers at more riska year in review : new earth discoveries in 2019a year in review : new earth discoveries in 2020esi missionsearth science research newsocean physics at nasaselected proposalsapplied sciences programcommon instrument interfacecii guidelines working meetingcii reference documentscii workshop 1cii workshop 2cii workshop 3essp program libraryestomissionsscience questionsearth dataevery day is earth dayresourcesglobal challengesapplications surveyeventsspace experimentsovervieworganizationstaff biosdecadal surveywhat we studyprogramsspace biologyanimal biologyanimal biology : what we studycell & molecular biology programdevelopmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programexperiments - animal biology programexperiments - cell & molecular biology programexperiments - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programexperiments - microbiology programexperiments - plant biology programhardware - animal biology programhardware - cell & molecular biology programhardware - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programhardware - microbiology programhardware - plant biology programmice behavior in space - animal biologymicrobiology programplant biology programpublications - animal biology programpublications - cell & molecular biology programpublications - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programpublications - microbiology programpublications - plant biology programspace biology science digestwhat we study - cell & molecular biology programwhat we study - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programwhat we study - microbiology programwhat we study - plant biology programphysical sciencesbiophysicscombustion sciencefluid physicsfundamental physicslife science flight projectsmaterials sciencestar 2020 participantsstar-2 ( 2021-2022 ) course participantsstar-3 ( 2022-2023 ) course participantssoft mattermissionsinvestigationsdatadocumentscommercialnews & mediawhat are the van allen belts and why do they matter ? missionsscience-enabling technologyoverviewsmd technology programstechnology highlightsoutput and resultsoverviewoverviewworkshop overviewforum agendagoogle docsspeaker presentations & videospeaker presentations & videossteering committeeorganizersspeakers and panelistsquestions & answerslunar discovery and explorationoverviewwhat we studyplanetary processesvolatile cyclesimpact history of earth/moonrecord of the ancient sunbiological systems on the moonphysical sciences on the moonplatform to the universeelementscommercial lunar payload serviceslunar instrument developmentsmallsats and cubesatslunar surface science mobility strategylunar reconnaissance orbiterapollo next generation sample analysisclps deliveriesto2-abto2-imto19cto19dto20a ( viper ) prime-1cp-11cp-12cs-3dataresourcesscience activationnewsscience @ nasapress releaseswatchsciencecastswe asked a nasa expertnasa science liveez sciencefor researchersoverviewnasa science social media consolidation faqfaqsolicitationssmd bridge programquestions and answers for smd bridge program workshop organizing committeeroses blognac science committeeoverviewmeetingsmembersscience advisory committeesastrophysics advisory committeeastrophysics analysis groupsearth science advisory committeeheliophysics advisory committeeplanetary science advisory committeeplanetary science analysis groupsbiological and physical sciences advisory committeeapplied sciences advisory committeesubcommitteesnasa postdoc programteamprogram officers listadvisory committeespi resources2021 virtual launchpad informationaccessibility statementaccessibility statementpi launchpad workshop contentpi launchpad workshop videospi launchpad : developing your first flight mission proposalpi launchpad : pre-application information sessionpi workshop sessionsquestions and answers about the pi launchpad 2021 virtual workshopquestions and answers about the pi launchpad 2023 in-person workshopresourcesscience mission directorate pi launchpad workshopscience datafaq for smd information policyopen-source science initiativeoverviewwhy do open science ? transform to open science ( tops ) smd ai initiativedata and computing architecture studyseries a workshopsseries c workshopsupcoming and past eventsopen-source science workshopoverviewagendacode of conductscience information policyhelp & supporthow to guidesvolunteer for review panelssuborbital programuaplearnersoverviewastrobiology standards alignmentsastrophysics standards alignmentsback to schoolearth science standards alignmentsheliophysics standards alignmentsplanetary science standards alignmentsthank you , teachers ! teamsexplore science activationscience activation teamsresourcessme mapnationwide eclipse ballooning project ( nebp ) ocean community engagement and awareness using nasa earth observations and science for hispanic/latino studentsopportunitiesnewshighlightshotlinespace placeget involvednasa science at homeart and scienceupcoming eventsconnectemail sign upfollow usresourcestoolkitsdiy - paper spacecraft modelsmission posters : solar systemnew horizons flybyvisual presentations earth day 2022citizen scienceprojectshighlightspublicationsnasa citizen scientistsabout usoverviewscience mission directorateleadershippeopleresourcesscience strategyscience strategydecadal surveysyear in review20152014201320122011201020082007200620052004workforce initiativesbest practices for establishing part-time/time-limited supervisory opportunitiesnew hires orientation workshoprotational program for scientistsscience career opportunities planning and exploration workshopscience career opportunities planning and exploration workshopcareersideaconnectcommunicationscontact usespañolscience in spanish . 
what is the black hole information paradox ? 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
what is the black hole information paradox ? . 
by paul sutter published 6 june 2019 . 
an artists depiction of a black hole . 
( image credit : nasa/jpl-caltech ) . 
paul m. sutter is an astrophysicist at the ohio state university , host of ask a spaceman and space radio , and author of your place in the universe . 
sutter contributed this article to space.coms expert voices : op-ed & insights . 
the universe really likes its information . 
it doesnt like to create new information , and it doesnt like to destroy any of its existing information.in fact , like is far too weak of a word . 
as far as we can tell ( and weve worked really , really hard to check ) , information is neither created nor destroyed : information throughout the universe simply persists.except in black holes . 
lets explain.related : eureka ! 
scientists photograph a black hole for the 1st time information overload first , we need to decide what we mean by information and why it ought to be preserved . 
physics is ruled by determinism : we can use the laws of physics to predict the future behavior of a system . 
thats kind of the entire point of physics . 
whether its a particle sitting in a box or a complex chemical reaction or the whole entire universe , our knowledge of physics allows us to make firm , reliable predictions that take our knowledge from the present into the future.and that same technique allows us to dig into the past . 
if we know all there is to know about a system , then the same laws of physics that extend into the future also extend into the past — we can run the clock forward or backward , seeing how that system has behaved or will behave with equal ease.its this reversibility that allows us to make the leap that information is preserved . 
if i know everything there is to know about a system — the positions and velocities of all the particles , their spins and electric charges , and all the other stuff — then the laws of physics tell me how all those particles will behave past and future . 
thus the raw information of the system — everything there is to know about it — is preserved across time ; it just gets rearranged , not created or destroyed.bye , bye black holes at first glance black holes seem to treat information innocently enough . 
stuff falls into black holes , along with their information . 
from the point of view of an external observer ( i.e. , us watching safely from a distance ) , nothing ever falls into a black hole — it just gets pasted onto the surface ( of course it ’ s a little more complicated than that , but that ’ s enough to understand the current dilemma ) . 
that situation isnt that big of a deal for information , which is neither created nor destroyed.except when the black hole evaporates , which creates a tiny problem . 
as stephen hawking first discovered in the 1970s , black holes arent entirely black . 
they do glow just a tiny , tiny bit . 
whats more , this conveniently named hawking radiation is completely thermal . 
it ’ s just random heat , just like your body gives off.that means that the amount and temperature of the radiation emitted depends only on the mass , spin and charge of the black hole . 
nothing else : no matter what you throw into a black hole , from books to cats to spaceships , its hawking radiation will stay the same.which is fine and dandy ; the information on the surface is still there , minding its own business . 
but as the black hole produces hawking radiation , it loses energy , which means it loses mass . 
which means it eventually disappears , along with all the information it was carrying.so if the information didnt leak out with the hawking radiation , and the black hole goes away , what happened to all the information ? hence , paradox.new physics to the rescue we dont have a resolution to the black hole information paradox , but that hasnt stopped starry-eyed theorists from dreaming up a host of potential solutions over the decades.maybe , for example , information is preserved after all . 
although this may seem like a simple statement , it involves rewriting almost all known physics . 
and black holes are the only places where weve run into trouble with this whole information-preserving thing , so is it really worth reinventing all our physical knowledge just to accommodate this one special case ? 
and yet , weve had to rewrite all of physics before , so its not like it would be the first time , and black holes are very compelling objects.or maybe hawking radiation isnt all its cracked up to be . 
maybe somehow the information stuck to the surface of the black hole does end up threading its way into the emitted radiation . 
maybe hawkings original analysis was too simple , and by careful observations of the radiation we could painstakingly reconstruct the books and cats and spaceships that fell in . 
while this would rescue all of known physics , nobody has been able to find a satisfactory way to actually , you know , make this happen.perhaps information doesnt get stuck to the surface , but instead is left behind in some sort of crunchy nugget just as the black hole finishes evaporating . 
that sounds lovely , but again , we have little to no idea of how this would actually work . 
or maybe its something even wilder , like the information getting funneled into another universe or looping back in time.whats exciting about this paradox is that all of the potential answers lead to new physics . 
no matter what , if we resolve the paradox , well do so by learning something new about the universe . 
3 huge questions the black hole image didnt answer all your questions about the new black hole image answered black hole photos could get even clearer with space-based telescopes learn more by listening to the episode what is the black hole information paradox ? 
on the ask a spaceman podcast , available on itunes . 
and on the web at http : //www.askaspaceman.com . 
thanks to peter g. for the questions that led to this piece ! 
ask your own question on twitter using # askaspaceman or by following paul @ paulmattsutter and facebook.com/paulmattsutter . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
paul suttersocial links navigationspace.com contributorpaul m. sutter is an astrophysicist at suny stony brook and the flatiron institute in new york city . 
paul received his phd in physics from the university of illinois at urbana-champaign in 2011 , and spent three years at the paris institute of astrophysics , followed by a research fellowship in trieste , italy , his research focuses on many diverse topics , from the emptiest regions of the universe to the earliest moments of the big bang to the hunt for the first stars . 
as an agent to the stars , paul has passionately engaged the public in science outreach for several years . 
he is the host of the popular ask a spaceman ! 
podcast , author of your place in the universe and how to die in space and he frequently appears on tv — including on the weather channel , for which he serves as official space specialist . 
more from space.1star trek annual 2023 is a holodeck trip through trek history2big asteroid to zoom by earth on wednesday3starspots could improve our understanding of habitable zones4south koreas danuri probe captures phases of earth from lunar orbit ( photo ) 5hubble spies strange spokes on saturns rings after 14-year hiatus ( video ) . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
supermassive black holes : characteristics and formation | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view deal . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
supermassive black holes : theory , characteristics and formation . 
by andrew maycontributions from scott dutfield published 10 march 2022 . 
a look at the supermassive black holes that lurk at the heart of most galaxies . 
an artist ’ s impression of a quasar powered by a supermassive black hole . 
( image credit : eso/m . 
jump to : . 
at the center of the galaxy . 
only a handful of supermassive black holes have been confirmed by scientists , but the universe could be filled with billions of these gravitational giants . 
theoretically , if you compress a sufficient amount of matter into a small enough space , it will create such a powerful gravitational field that nothing — not even light — can escape from it . 
that ’ s the basic idea behind black holes , and it ’ s so bizarre that for many years people thought they couldn ’ t possibly exist in reality , according to university of texas in austin .yet today we know the universe is filled with them — perhaps as many as one for every ten visible stars , according to live science . 
a few of those black holes are truly enormous , with masses millions of times greater than the sun . 
here we take a closer look at the strange world of supermassive black holes.how big are supermassive black holes ? it ’ s impossible to observe a black hole directly , because — as their name suggests — they don ’ t emit any light or other radiation . 
but they can be detected via their gravitational effect on visible stars in their neighbourhood , which orbit around the black hole much faster than they would around a normal object of similar size . 
by measuring the speed of stars close to the black hole , astronomers can estimate its mass . 
that ’ s how they know , for example , that the black hole at the center of our own galaxy has a mass around four million times that of the sun , according to nasa .as big as that sounds , it ’ s really quite tiny compared to the largest supermassive black holes that have been measured — some of which approach 100 billion solar masses . , supermassive black hole examplesimage 1 of 4 ( image credit : scott anttila/cc by 3.0 ) leo i dwarf galaxy although this tiny galaxy is only about 20 million solar masses in total , its central black hole is proportionately huge , at around 3 million solar masses . 
( image credit : eso/wfi ( optical ) ; mpifr/eso/apex/a.weiss et al . 
( submillimetre ) ; nasa/cxc/cfa/r.kraft et al . 
( x-ray ) ) centaurus a this huge elliptical galaxy – a cosmic neighbour at just 13 million light-years – is a powerful radio emitter thanks to the 55 million solar mass black hole at its center . 
( image credit : eso/vst atlas team . 
acknowledgement- durham university/casu/wfau ) ngc 7727 the product of two merging galaxies , ngc 7727 still retains two separate supermassive black holes – of 154 and 6.3 million solar masses – just 1,600 light-years apart near its center . 
( image credit : nasa ; esa ; m. postman , stsci ; t. lauer , noao , tucson ; clash team ) abell 2261 this cluster of galaxies is estimated to have a black hole of up to 100 billion solar masses near its center . 
frustratingly , its exact location continues to elude detection . 
black holes at the center of galaxiesrather than devouring anything that ventures too close to them , the black holes at the centers of most galaxies only give away their existence through subtle effects on nearby stars . 
in an active galaxy , however , the supermassive black hole behaves a lot differently . 
when surrounded by a swirling accretion disk of rapidly rotating gas and dust , matter is constantly spiralling down into the black hole . 
in the process , it releases enormous amounts of energy , sometimes even outshining the rest of the galaxy . 
in 2019 the event horizon telescope succeeded in photographing one such galaxy — messier 87 — producing a direct image of the accretion disc . 
the ominous shadow of the galaxy ’ s 6.5 billion solar mass black hole is clearly visible , quite literally as a black hole at the center of the disk.how supermassive black holes are formedmovies often portray black holes as giant cosmic vacuum cleaners , relentlessly sucking in other material until there ’ s nothing left . 
if that was how real black holes worked , there ’ d be no mystery as to where the supermassive kind came from : once an ordinary black hole had formed from stellar collapse , it would simply grow and grow until it reached enormous size . 
but real black holes don ’ t suck matter in like this ; they merely attract it with the same law of gravity as a normal object of the same mass.their exceptional nature comes from the fact that they ’ re super-condensed and the force of gravity increases as distance decreases . 
so it ’ s possible for an orbiting object to stray into a region where gravity becomes incredibly strong . 
at larger distances , however , a black hole ’ s gravity is perfectly normal . 
but if a black hole is incapable of sucking in distant matter , how does it ever grow to supermassive size ? 
at present no one knows the answer to this , although there are several promising theories.related links– what happens at the center of a black hole ? – white holes : what we know about black holes neglected twins– where do black holes lead to ? – black dwarf stars : the ( theoretical ) end of stellar evolutionalthough they may not be the rapacious predators portrayed in sci-fi , we know that some black holes do absorb new material and that ’ s what ’ s going on in the accretion disks of active galaxies , for example . 
occasionally pairs of black holes crash into each other and merge to produce a single , larger black hole and we know that from the evidence of gravitational waves , which have been observed on a regular basis since they were first discovered in 2015.but accretion and mergers , while undoubtedly part of the solution , aren ’ t enough in themselves to explain the observational evidence for supermassive black holes . 
that ’ s because we know the first active galaxies — which must have been powered by central black holes – were formed very early in the life of the universe . 
for example , a supermassive black hole of a billion solar masses is believed to have existed in one galaxy more than 12 billion years ago — around 90 % of the way back to the big bang.it ’ s possible that the stellar life cycle , which is so crucial to the standard model of black hole formation , had nothing to do with the creation of the oldest supermassive black holes . 
instead , they may have formed almost immediately from the gravitational collapse of an enormous cloud of gas — one that already contained as much matter as millions of stars . 
according to this theory , a direct collapse black hole of this kind would have taken around 150 million years to form — the blink of an eye in cosmic terms.another hypothesis invokes the idea of primordial black holes , which are theorised to have been created in the big bang itself . 
these are sometimes proposed as a possible explanation for dark matter , and are generally assumed to have been quite small in size . 
however , they might have served as the basic seeds from which present-day supermassive black holes grew .additional resources for more information about black holes check out death by black hole - and other cosmic quandaries . 
by neil degrasse tyson and gravitys fatal attraction : black holes in the universe . 
by mitchell begelman and martin rees . 
bibliographypatchen barss , the mysterious origins of universes biggest black holes . , bbc , august 2021 . 
university of texas in austin , history of black holes . , accessed january 2022 . 
stephen batttersby , monster munch : how did black holes get vast so fast ? 
. , new scientist , march 2013 . 
alison klesman , what are primordial black holes ? 
. , astronomy , july 2019.esa , ​​what happens when two supermassive black holes merge ? 
. , may 2019 . 
nasa , exploring active galactic nuclei . , february 2016 . 
shobha kaicker , how do astronomers calculate the mass of a black hole ? 
. , astronomy , april 2020 . 
nasa , black holes . , march 2022 . 
nasa , active galaxies . , september 2021 . 
nasa , stars . , september 2021. . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
andrew maysocial links navigationastrophysicistandrew may holds a ph.d. in astrophysics from manchester university , u.k. for 30 years , he worked in the academic , government and private sectors , before becoming a science writer where he has written for fortean times , how it works , all about space , bbc science focus , among others . 
he has also written a selection of books including cosmic impact and astrobiology : the search for life elsewhere in the universe , published by icon books.with contributions fromscott dutfieldcontributor . 
more from space.1chelyabinsk meteor explosion was a planetary defense wakeup call2heres how chinas astronauts keep fit aboard tiangong space station ( video ) 3virgin orbit traces failed uk rocket launch to dislodged fuel filter4star trek annual 2023 is a holodeck trip through trek history5big asteroid to zoom by earth on wednesday . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
latest news about black holes . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view deal . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
a black hole is a location in space that possesses so much gravity , nothing can escape its pull , even light . 
learn more about what black holes are and the latest news.related topics : dark matter , the big bang theory , gravitational waves , the theory of relativity in space . 
black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy . 
published 16 february 23. . 
black holes may be the origin of dark energy , according to a study by a team of researchers led by the university of hawaii . 
galactic collisions act as a cosmic delivery service for hungry monster black holes . 
published 27 january 23. . 
astronomers may finally know what delivers the gas that feeds the powerful phenomena surrounding active black holes . 
star survives spaghettification by black hole . 
published 20 january 23. . 
a star has survived a close encounter with a black hole , but the black hole has been able to sneak a second bite . 
black holes at galactic centers blast out 10 times more light than previously thought . 
published 18 january 23. . 
black holes residing at the center of galaxies produce way more energy than scientists previously thought , a new study has revealed . 
could humans use black holes to time travel ? . 
published 17 january 23. . 
black holes form natural time machines that allow travel to both the past and the future . 
but dont expect to be visiting dinosaurs any time soon . 
hungry black hole is transforming star into a stellar taffy and a cosmic donut . 
published 13 january 23. . 
a distant black hole has a real sweet tooth , stretching a star that ventured too close to it into a stellar taffy and a doughnut the size of the solar system before devouring it . 
hungry black holes trapped in an intimate dance feast on leftovers from a galactic merger . 
published 10 january 23. . 
a nearby galaxy merger harbors two black holes locked in a cosmic dance , according to new research . 
some black hole mergers happen in chaotic star cluster carnivals . 
published 3 january 23. . 
many black hole collisions may occur in densely packed star clusters , hinting at what might cause these violent mergers . 
feeding black hole blows cosmic bubbles amid high-energy burps . 
published 2 january 23. . 
a feeding supermassive black hole in the galactic cluster ms0735 is b is burping out huge amounts of energy clearing cosmic bubbles in its surroundings . 
how gravitational waves can see inside black holes . 
published 2 january 23. . 
what lurks at the center of a black hole ? 
studying the space-time ripples from black hole collisions could reveal an answer . 
15 times black holes surprised us in 2022. . 
charles q. choi . 
published 28 december 22. . 
over the past year , astronomers have gleaned new insights into black holes across the universe . 
here is a list of 15 times black holes surprised us in 2022. . 
nasa watches black hole snack on destroyed stars corpse . 
published 22 december 22. . 
astronomers have witnessed a black hole feeding on the remains of a star it ripped apart , spotting the formation of a halo of hot gas called a corona . 
super-distant black hole is eating half a sun a year and blasting its leftovers at earth . 
published 30 november 22. . 
astronomers have made the most distant observation of a black hole ripping apart a star and feasting upon it , thanks to a jet of stellar leftovers blasted directly toward earth . 
lab-grown black hole may prove stephen hawkings most challenging theory right . 
published 30 november 22. . 
by using a chain of atoms to simulate a black holes event horizon , researchers have shown that hawking radiation may exist just as the late physicist described . 
the hunt is on in neighboring galaxy for 2nd closest monster black hole to earth . 
published 30 november 22. . 
astronomers may finally have a way to hunt for a monstrous supermassive black hole they suspect lurks in the dwarf galaxy next door . 
x-ray view shows how supermassive black holes speed up particles in jets . 
published 23 november 22. . 
observations with nasas imaging x-ray polarimetry explorer spacecraft have shed light on how particles are accelerated to nearly the speed of light in a blazars jet . 
scientists discover massive extragalactic structure behind the milky way . 
published 13 november 22. . 
an uncharted region of space known as the zone of avoidance lurks behind the milky ways center – and astronomers just found an enormous , multi-galaxy structure there . 
black hole announces itself to astronomers by violently ripping apart a star . 
last updated 10 november 22. . 
a distant intermediate black hole has signaled its presence to researchers by blasting out intense radiation as it ripped apart an unfortunate star that wandered too close to it . 
newfound black hole is closest known to earth . 
published 4 november 22. . 
a black hole 10 times more massive than our sun lurks just 1,560 light-years from earth — about twice as close as the previous proximity champ . 
nasa x-ray observatory reveals how black holes swallow stars and spit out matter . 
published 3 november 22. . 
the x-ray binary system cygnus x-1 is chomping on matter stolen from a companion star . 
sign up for e-mail newsletters . 
your email address : . 
contact me with news and offers from other future brands . 
receive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsors . 
thank you for signing up to space . 
you will receive a verification email shortly . 
there was a problem . 
please refresh the page and try again . 
by submitting your information you agree to the terms & conditions . 
and privacy policy . 
and are aged 16 or over . 
more from space.1pictures from space ! 
our image of the day2nasas heartbeat-detecting tech to help with turkey earthquake relief effort3nasa names moon mountain after black mathematician and hidden figure melba mouton4astronomers unravel how complex organic molecules form in deep space5goldilocks zone : everything you need to know about the habitable sweet spot . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
these two neutron stars collided : are they a black hole now ? 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
2 neutron stars collided , so are they a black hole now ? . 
by harrison tasoff published 16 october 2017 . 
for the first time , scientists have seen the source of gravitational waves from two colliding neutron stars , and the space oddity doesnt stop there . 
those neutron stars might have collapsed into a black hole after they merged , scientists say.on aug. 17 , 2017 , the gravitational-wave observatories ligo ( short for the laser interferometer gravitational-wave observatory ) and virgo detected a strong signal from the galaxy ngc 4993 . 
scientists pinpointed the source of that signal in the sky , and an international collaboration immediately sprung forth to observe the event with terrestrial and space observatories . 
researchers detected light from the neutron-star crash across the entire electromagnetic spectrum , beginning with a burst of high-energy gamma-rays seconds after the gravitational waves were detected.the observations indicate that the waves and light came from a pair of merging neutron stars about 130 million light-years away , according to a news conference on monday oct. 16 , 2017 . 
neutron stars are the incredibly dense remnants of stars that have exploded in supernovas . 
the two that merged were 1.6 and 1.1 times as massive as our sun , but each was no wider than washington , d.c. , according to a statement by the space telescope science institute . 
[ when neutron stars collide ! 
what telescopes saw ( videos ) ] this still from a nasa animation shows the aftermath of a collision of two neutron stars , which merged into an objected called gw170817 . 
gravitational waves from the collision were detected on aug. 17 , 2017 . 
( image credit : nasas goddard space flight center/ci lab ) as the stars spiraled into each other , they sent gravitational waves through the universe and released tremendous amounts of light when they finally collided . 
scientist call the phenomenon a kilonova.we dont actually know what happened to the objects at the end , david shoemaker , a senior research scientist at mit and a spokesman for the ligo scientific collaboration , said at a news conference today ( oct. 16 ) at the national press club in washington , d.c. we dont know whether its a black hole , a neutron star or something else.from neutron stars to black hole ? such a massive object could collapse under its own weight , forming a black hole . 
a black hole is essentially a point of infinite density surrounded by a region of no return — the event horizon , inside which not even light can escape.if the new object did collapse into a black hole , its the lightest one that we know about , harvard astronomer edo berger said at the news conference . 
bergers team analyzed the light from the kilonova and found evidence of superheavy elements , like gold and platinum , forged in the violent event . 
[ what neutron stars are made of ( infographic ) ] the kilonova associated with gw170817 ( inset ) as observed by nasas hubble space telescope ( visible light ) and chandra x-ray observatory ( blue ) over nine days in august 2017 . 
( image credit : nasa/cxc/e . 
troja ) eleonora troja , a high-energy astrophysicist at the university of maryland and nasas goddard space flight center , expressed a bit more confidence in what the new object may be . 
[ its ] very likely the collision of two neutron stars resulted in a new black hole , she said at the news conference.troja has good reason to believe the stars did form a black hole . 
right after the gamma-rays and gravitational waves were detected on earth , nasas swift gamma-ray burst observatory , which orbits high above earth , returned some interesting results : a bright source of ultraviolet light , but no x-rays . 
this was the first time in the swift observatorys 13 years of working on the mission that it had come up empty-handed , according to troja . 
nasas chandra x-ray observatory , and nuclear spectroscopic telescope array ( nustar ) , also saw nothing in the x-ray spectrum.a signal ! 
but from what ? nine days after the gravitational waves were detected by ligo and virgo , trojas team finally picked up a faint x-ray signal — one so weak only the space-based chandra x-ray observatory could detect it.for troja , the faint signal suggests the presence something far more powerful : jets of matter and radiation spewing the same amount of energy in a few days that the sun radiates over millions of years.the paltry signal was an effect of the viewing angle , raffaella margutti , an astrophysicist at northwestern university , told space.com . 
it took nine days for the jet to spread out enough for the spray of x-rays to begin hitting earth , she said . 
margutti is the lead author on one of the chandra x-ray observatory studies that resulted from the discovery , and a coauthor on at leat eight related studies.the swift ultraviolet/optical telescope imaged the kilonova from two merging neutron stars in the galaxy ngc 4993 ( inset ) on aug. 18 , 2017 , just 15 hours after gravitational waves and a gamma-ray burst from the event was detected . 
( image credit : nasa/swift ) margutti cautioned that many astronomical objects can produce jets . 
they simply need enough energy to feed a stream of material and an axis of rotation to establish the direction from which the material shoots out.theres nothing obvious … that would tell us that the remnant was a black hole or neutron star , margutti said.x-ray and radio observatories are still gathering data on the kilonova remnant , but scientists may never know what became of the two stars . 
once the light is off , we will never see it again , margutti said.email harrison tasoff at htasoff @ space.com or follow him @ harrisontasoff . 
follow us @ spacedotcom , facebook and google+ . 
original article on space.com . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
harrison tasoffsocial links navigationformer contributing writerharrison tasoff is a science journalist originally from los angeles . 
he graduated from nyu ’ s science , health , and environmental reporting program after earning his b.a . 
in mathematics at swarthmore college . 
harrison covers an array of subjects , but often finds himself drawn to physics , ecology , and earth science stories . 
in his spare time , he enjoys tidepooling , mineral collecting , and tending native plants . 
more from space.1pictures from space ! 
our image of the day2nasas heartbeat-detecting tech to help with turkey earthquake relief effort3nasa names moon mountain after black mathematician and hidden figure melba mouton4astronomers unravel how complex organic molecules form in deep space5goldilocks zone : everything you need to know about the habitable sweet spot . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
the event horizon telescope is trying to take the first-ever photo of a black hole | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
the event horizon telescope is trying to take the first-ever photo of a black hole . 
by doris elin urrutia published 8 april 2019 . 
snapping a black holes silhouette is like photographing an orange on the moon . 
astronomers orchestrated radio dish telescopes across the world into an earth-size virtual camera for a bold new experiment attempting to deliver the first-ever image of a black hole . 
the telescope collaboration is set to make a big announcement of results this week , and members also described their research approach at a talk in march.black holes are extreme warps in space-time that are so strong , their massive gravity doesnt even let light escape once it gets close enough . 
the astronomers idea is to photograph the circular opaque silhouette of a black hole cast on a bright background . 
the shadows edge is the event horizon , a black holes point of no return . 
a picture is worth a thousand words , and a photograph of a black hole would be an important tool for understanding astrophysics , cosmology and the role of black holes in the universe . 
related : groundbreaking result coming from black-hole hunting event horizon telescopea still of a video simulation that shows what a black hole shadow might look like . 
the animation was featured in a short movie about the event horizon telescope ( eht ) project , produced by peter galison and chyld king . 
watch a livestreamed announcement of the event horizon telescopes first results on april 10 , 2019 at 9 a.m. edt here . 
( image credit : eht outreach/youtube ) if an astronaut laid an orange on the surface of the moon , the citrus fruit would be very difficult to view from earth . 
black holes are just as hard to spot , said sheperd doeleman , the project director of an ambitious new project called the event horizon telescope.doeleman shared this anecdote with an audience at a panel at the south by southwest ( sxsw ) festival in austin , texas , last month . 
doeleman and fellow collaborators sera markoff , peter galison and dimitrios psaltis illuminated how the project works during the sxsw event , eht : a planetary effort to photograph a black hole.black holes are massive structures when compared to planets and humans . 
but what seems large to us , is , on a galactic scale , teeny-tiny . 
so photographing a black holes event horizon complicated.this artists impression depicts a rapidly spinning supermassive black hole surrounded by an accretion disk . 
this thin disk of rotating material consists of the leftovers of a sun-like star which was ripped apart by the tidal forces of the black hole . 
shocks in the colliding debris as well as heat generated in accretion led to a burst of light , resembling a supernova explosion . 
( image credit : eso , esa/hubble , m. kornmesser/n . 
bartmann ) one of the eht targets is about 10 percent of the size of our solar system , sera markoff , an astrophysicist from the university of amsterdam , said during the panel . 
the supermassive black hole at the center of the milky way , called sagittarius a * , is about the size of the orbit of mercury , doeleman added . 
if a spaceship could zip astronomers out of the milky way , which is about 50 billion times bigger than sagittarius a * , according to markoff , then spotting this black hole among the billions of other stars and planets in the galaxy would be quite tricky . 
to observe the supermassive black hole at the center of the milky way galaxy , or to view another of the projects targets — the supermassive black hole at the core of the supergiant elliptical galaxy messier 87 — the eht team had to turn earth into a virtual telescope platform . 
thats because the power of a telescope to resolve images is limited to the size of its dish , and by using an array of instruments across the world , the team is effectively breaking up the dish and scattering the pieces globally to make one big space eye.related : this huge black hole is spinning at half the speed of light ! the south pole telescope illuminated by the milky way and the aurora australis ( southern lights ) . 
watch a livestreamed announcement of the event horizon telescopes first results on april 10 , 2019 at 9 a.m. edt here . 
( image credit : daniel michalik/south pole telescope ) the radio telescope observatories involved in ehts 2017 observations were alma ( atacama large millimeter/submillimeter array in chile ; apex ( atacama pathfinder experiment ) in chile ; iram 30m ( institut de radioastronomie millimétrique ) in spain ; lmt ( large millimeter telescope ) in mexico ; smt ( submillimeter telescope ) in arizona ; jcmt ( james clerk maxwell telescope ) in hawaii ; sma ( submillimeter array ) in hawaii ; and spt ( south pole telescope ) in antarctica.coordinated observations were also made in the x-ray and gamma-ray bands.sagittarius a * is dormant , which means it doesnt actively consume a lot of nearby stars and gas , releasing radiation . 
an active black hole lurks inside messier 87 . 
to view the neighborhood supermassive black hole and the one churning farther away , the telescopes need to observe the entire range of the electromagnetic spectrum , from the radio up to the gamma rays , markoff said.the event horizon telescope network , mapped on googlemaps with data from nasa and terrametrics . 
watch a livestreamed announcement of the event horizon telescopes first results on april 10 , 2019 at 9 a.m. edt here . 
( image credit : event horizon telescope ) was einstein 100 % right ? at the projects core , its 200 scientists want to answer two questions , according to psaltis , an astronomer and physicist at the university of arizona . 
the first is simply if photographing a black hole is possible . 
but the second important thing they ask is if einstein was 100 percent right about how black holes behave . 
einstein told us 100 years ago exactly what the size and the shape of that [ black holes ] shadow should be . 
if we could lay a ruler across that shadow , wed be able to test einsteins theory of the black hole boundary , doeleman said . 
the team also wanted to build models that would describe black holes in various circumstances , which will then be compared to eht observations.this infographic shows a simulation of the outflow ( bright red ) from a black hole and the accretion disk around it , with simulated images of the three potential shapes of the event horizons shadow . 
( image credit : eso/n . 
ozel ) in the work described at sxsw , the team used graphics processing units ( gpus ) , like the ones used in your favorite video game consoles or your computer , to model all the hypothetical varieties of a black hole environment . 
they produced hundreds of gigabytes of 3d volume data to model the possibilities . 
psaltis said photons , plasma , gas and magnetic fields are all described in a black holes forecast . 
once they get one , the team can compare an image of a black holes shadow to the different scenarios processed by the gpus in order to make the most realistic simulation of how a black hole behaves , based on our current understanding of physics . 
what the black hole image could do for us , if we can get it , would be to take something that is the most extreme , the strangest prediction of general relativity , one of the great accomplishments of the human mind , [ and ] combine it with the most advanced electronics with a planetary scale collaboration with the most advanced statistics [ and ] new imaging techniques , galison , a professor at harvard university , said during the panel . 
its like making a new camera with a new kind of film , a new kind of lens , combining it with other cameras , all at once , and if that could happen , if we could actually get in and see right up close to the horizon.galison added that the first picture of a black hole would prove , beyond a shadow of a doubt — pun intended — that these gargantuan , mighty and elusive structures do exist.mysterious cow blast in space may reveal birth of a black holethis trippy simulation shows how monster black holes glow before they colliderarely seen middleweight black hole gobbles starfollow doris elin salazar on twitter @ salazar_elin . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
doris elin urrutiasocial links navigationcontributing writerdoris is a science journalist and space.com contributor . 
she received a b.a . 
in sociology and communications at fordham university in new york city . 
her first work was published in collaboration with london mining network , where her love of science writing was born . 
her passion for astronomy started as a kid when she helped her sister build a model solar system in the bronx . 
she got her first shot at astronomy writing as a space.com editorial intern and continues to write about all things cosmic for the website . 
doris has also written about microscopic plant life for scientific american ’ s website and about whale calls for their print magazine . 
she has also written about ancient humans for inverse , with stories ranging from how to recreate pompeii ’ s cuisine to how to map the polynesian expansion through genomics . 
she currently shares her home with two rabbits . 
follow her on twitter at @ salazar_elin . 
more from space.1india tests recovery of spacecraft for gaganyaan astronaut mission ( photos ) 2russian cargo ship arrived at space station early saturday3on this day in space : feb. 11 , 2010 : nasa launches solar dynamics observatory4watch spacex launch 55 starlink satellites early sunday morning5relive spacex starships epic 31-engine burn with these photos . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
supermassive black hole - wikipedia . 
jump to content . 
create accountlog in . 
create account log in . 
.pages for logged out editors learn more . 
main pagecontentscurrent eventsrandom articleabout wikipediacontact usdonate . 
helplearn to editcommunity portalrecent changesupload file . 
what links hererelated changesupload filespecial pagespermanent linkpage informationcite this pagewikidata item . 
download as pdfprintable version . 
in other projects . 
on this wikipedia the language links are at the top of the page across from the article title . 
go to top . 
move to sidebar . 
( top ) . 
2history of research . 
3.2direct-collapse and primordial black holes . 
3.3maximum mass limit . 
4activity and galactic evolution . 
5.2in the milky way . 
5.3outside the milky way . 
.toggle the table of contents . 
supermassive black hole . 
afrikaansالعربيةasturianuбългарскиcatalàčeštinaالدارجةdeutscheestiespañolesperantoeuskaraفارسیfrançais한국어हिन्दीhrvatskibahasa indonesiaitalianoעבריתქართულიlietuviųmagyarмакедонскиმარგალურიbahasa melayunederlands日本語norsk bokmålnorsk nynorskoccitanਪੰਜਾਬੀpolskiportuguêsromânăрусскийසිංහලsimple englishslovenčinaslovenščinaсрпски / srpskisrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиsuomisvenskaதமிழ்ไทยtürkçeукраїнськаtiếng việt吴语粵語中文 . 
from wikipedia , the free encyclopedia . 
this article is about the astronomical object . 
for the song , see supermassive black hole ( song ) . 
largest type of black hole . 
the first direct image of a supermassive black hole , located at the galactic core of messier 87 . 
[ 1 ] [ 2 ] it shows radio-wave emission from a heated accretion ring orbiting the object at a mean separation of 350 au , or ten times larger than the orbit of neptune around the sun . 
the dark center is the event horizon and its shadow . 
[ 3 ] the image was released in 2019 by the event horizon telescope collaboration . 
a supermassive black hole ( smbh or sometimes sbh ) [ a ] is the largest type of black hole , with its mass being on the order of hundreds of thousands , or millions to billions of times the mass of the sun ( m☉ ) . 
black holes are a class of astronomical objects that have undergone gravitational collapse , leaving behind spheroidal regions of space from which nothing can escape , not even light . 
observational evidence indicates that almost every large galaxy has a supermassive black hole at its center . 
[ 4 ] [ 5 ] for example , the milky way has a supermassive black hole in its galactic center , corresponding to the radio source sagittarius a * . 
[ 6 ] [ 7 ] accretion of interstellar gas onto supermassive black holes is the process responsible for powering active galactic nuclei ( agns ) and quasars . [ 8 ] . 
two supermassive black holes have been directly imaged by the event horizon telescope : the black hole in the giant elliptical galaxy messier 87 and the black hole at the milky way ’ s center . [ 9 ] . 
description [ edit ] . 
supermassive black holes are classically defined as black holes with a mass above 100,000 ( 105 ) solar masses ( m☉ ) ; some have masses of several billion m☉ . 
[ 10 ] supermassive black holes have physical properties that clearly distinguish them from lower-mass classifications . 
first , the tidal forces in the vicinity of the event horizon are significantly weaker for supermassive black holes . 
the tidal force on a body at a black holes event horizon is inversely proportional to the square of the black holes mass : [ 11 ] a person at the event horizon of a 10 million m☉ black hole experiences about the same tidal force between their head and feet as a person on the surface of the earth . 
unlike with stellar mass black holes , one would not experience significant tidal force until very deep into the black holes event horizon . [ 12 ] . 
it is somewhat counterintuitive to note that the average density of a smbh within its event horizon ( defined as the mass of the black hole divided by the volume of space within its schwarzschild radius ) can be less than the density of water . 
[ 13 ] this is because the schwarzschild radius ( . 
{ \displaystyle r_ { \text { s } } } . 
is directly proportional to its mass . 
since the volume of a spherical object ( such as the event horizon of a non-rotating black hole ) is directly proportional to the cube of the radius , the density of a black hole is inversely proportional to the square of the mass , and thus higher mass black holes have lower average density . [ 14 ] . 
the schwarzschild radius of the event horizon of a nonrotating and uncharged supermassive black hole of around 1 billion m☉ is comparable to the semi-major axis of the orbit of planet uranus , which is 19 . 
au . [ 15 ] [ 16 ] . 
some astronomers refer to black holes of greater than 5 billion m☉ as ultramassive black holes ( umbhs or ubhs ) , [ 17 ] [ 18 ] but the term is not broadly used . 
possible examples include the black holes at the centres of ton 618 , ngc 6166 , eso 444-46 and ngc 4889 , [ 19 ] which are among the most massive black holes known . 
some studies have suggested that the maximum natural mass that a black hole can reach , while being luminous accretors ( featuring an accretion disk ) , is typically of the order of about 50 billion m☉ . [ 20 ] [ 21 ] . 
history of research [ edit ] . 
the story of how supermassive black holes were found began with the investigation by maarten schmidt of the radio source 3c 273 in 1963 . 
initially this was thought to be a star , but the spectrum proved puzzling . 
it was determined to be hydrogen emission lines that had been red shifted , indicating the object was moving away from the earth . 
[ 22 ] hubbles law showed that the object was located several billion light-years away , and thus must be emitting the energy equivalent of hundreds of galaxies . 
the rate of light variations of the source dubbed a quasi-stellar object , or quasar , suggested the emitting region had a diameter of one parsec or less . 
four such sources had been identified by 1964 . [ 23 ] . 
in 1963 , fred hoyle and w. a. fowler proposed the existence of hydrogen burning supermassive stars ( sms ) as an explanation for the compact dimensions and high energy output of quasars . 
these would have a mass of about 105 – 109 m☉ . 
however , richard feynman noted stars above a certain critical mass are dynamically unstable and would collapse into a black hole , at least if they were non-rotating . 
[ 24 ] fowler then proposed that these supermassive stars would undergo a series of collapse and explosion oscillations , thereby explaining the energy output pattern . 
appenzeller and fricke ( 1972 ) built models of this behavior , but found that the resulting star would still undergo collapse , concluding that a non-rotating 0.75×106 m☉ sms can not escape collapse to a black hole by burning its hydrogen through the cno cycle . [ 25 ] . 
edwin e. salpeter and yakov zeldovich made the proposal in 1964 that matter falling onto a massive compact object would explain the properties of quasars . 
it would require a mass of around 108 m☉ to match the output of these objects . 
donald lynden-bell noted in 1969 that the infalling gas would form a flat disk that spirals into the central schwarzschild throat . 
he noted that the relatively low output of nearby galactic cores implied these were old , inactive quasars . 
[ 26 ] meanwhile , in 1967 , martin ryle and malcolm longair suggested that nearly all sources of extra-galactic radio emission could be explained by a model in which particles are ejected from galaxies at relativistic velocities ; meaning they are moving near the speed of light . 
[ 27 ] martin ryle , malcolm longair , and peter scheuer then proposed in 1973 that the compact central nucleus could be the original energy source for these relativistic jets . [ 26 ] . 
arthur m. wolfe and geoffrey burbidge noted in 1970 that the large velocity dispersion of the stars in the nuclear region of elliptical galaxies could only be explained by a large mass concentration at the nucleus ; larger than could be explained by ordinary stars . 
they showed that the behavior could be explained by a massive black hole with up to 1010 m☉ , or a large number of smaller black holes with masses below 103 m☉ . 
[ 28 ] dynamical evidence for a massive dark object was found at the core of the active elliptical galaxy messier 87 in 1978 , initially estimated at 5×109 m☉ . 
[ 29 ] discovery of similar behavior in other galaxies soon followed , including the andromeda galaxy in 1984 and the sombrero galaxy in 1988 . [ 4 ] . 
donald lynden-bell and martin rees hypothesized in 1971 that the center of the milky way galaxy would contain a massive black hole . 
[ 30 ] sagittarius a * was discovered and named on february 13 and 15 , 1974 , by astronomers bruce balick and robert brown using the green bank interferometer of the national radio astronomy observatory . 
[ 31 ] they discovered a radio source that emits synchrotron radiation ; it was found to be dense and immobile because of its gravitation . 
this was , therefore , the first indication that a supermassive black hole exists in the center of the milky way . 
the hubble space telescope , launched in 1990 , provided the resolution needed to perform more refined observations of galactic nuclei . 
in 1994 the faint object spectrograph on the hubble was used to observe messier 87 , finding that ionized gas was orbiting the central part of the nucleus at a velocity of ±500 km/s . 
the data indicated a concentrated mass of ( 2.4±0.7 ) ×109 m☉ lay within a 0.25″ span , providing strong evidence of a supermassive black hole . 
[ 32 ] using the very long baseline array to observe messier 106 , miyoshi et al . 
( 1995 ) were able to demonstrate that the emission from an h2o maser in this galaxy came from a gaseous disk in the nucleus that orbited a concentrated mass of 3.6×107 m☉ , which was constrained to a radius of 0.13 parsecs . 
their ground-breaking research noted that a swarm of solar mass black holes within a radius this small would not survive for long without undergoing collisions , making a supermassive black hole the sole viable candidate . 
[ 33 ] accompanying this observation which provided the first confirmation of supermassive black holes was the discovery [ 34 ] of the highly broadened , ionised iron . 
kα emission line ( 6.4 kev ) from the galaxy mcg-6-30-15 . 
the broadening was due to the gravitational redshift of the light as it escaped from just 3 to 10 schwarzschild radii from the black hole . 
on april 10 , 2019 , the event horizon telescope collaboration released the first horizon-scale image of a black hole , in the center of the galaxy messier 87 . 
[ 2 ] in march 2020 , astronomers suggested that additional subrings should form the photon ring , proposing a way of better detecting these signatures in the first black hole image . [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] . 
formation [ edit ] . 
an artists conception of a supermassive black hole surrounded by an accretion disk and emitting a relativistic jet . 
the origin of supermassive black holes remains an active field of research . 
astrophysicists agree that black holes can grow by accretion of matter and by merging with other black holes . 
[ 38 ] [ 39 ] there are several hypotheses for the formation mechanisms and initial masses of the progenitors , or seeds , of supermassive black holes . 
independently of the specific formation channel for the black hole seed , given sufficient mass nearby , it could accrete to become an intermediate-mass black hole and possibly a smbh if the accretion rate persists . [ 40 ] . 
distant and early supermassive black holes , such as j0313–1806 , [ 41 ] and ulas j1342+0928 , [ 42 ] are hard to explain so soon after the big bang . 
some postulate they might come from direct collapse of dark matter with self-interaction . 
[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] a small minority of sources argue that they may be evidence that the universe is the result of a big bounce , instead of a big bang , with these supermassive black holes being formed before the big bounce . [ 46 ] [ 47 ] . 
first stars [ edit ] . 
this section needs to be updated . 
please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information . 
( november 2022 ) . 
main articles : population iii star , quasi-star , and dark star ( dark matter ) . 
the early progenitor seeds may be black holes of tens or perhaps hundreds of m☉ that are left behind by the explosions of massive stars and grow by accretion of matter . 
another model involves a dense stellar cluster undergoing core collapse as the negative heat capacity of the system drives the velocity dispersion in the core to relativistic speeds . [ 48 ] [ 49 ] . 
before the first stars , large gas clouds could collapse into a quasi-star , which would in turn collapse into a black hole of around 20 m☉ . 
[ 40 ] these stars may have also been formed by dark matter halos drawing in enormous amounts of gas by gravity , which would then produce supermassive stars with tens of thousands of m☉ . 
[ 50 ] [ 51 ] the quasi-star becomes unstable to radial perturbations because of electron-positron pair production in its core and could collapse directly into a black hole without a supernova explosion ( which would eject most of its mass , preventing the black hole from growing as fast ) . 
a more recent theory proposes that smbh seeds were formed in the very early universe each from the collapse of a supermassive star with mass of around 100,000 m☉ . [ 52 ] . 
direct-collapse and primordial black holes [ edit ] . 
large , high-redshift clouds of metal-free gas , [ 53 ] when irradiated by a sufficiently intense flux of lyman–werner photons , [ 54 ] can avoid cooling and fragmenting , thus collapsing as a single object due to self-gravitation . 
[ 55 ] [ 56 ] the core of the collapsing object reaches extremely large values of the matter density , of the order of about 107 g/cm3 , and triggers a general relativistic instability . 
[ 57 ] thus , the object collapses directly into a black hole , without passing from the intermediate phase of a star , or of a quasi-star . 
these objects have a typical mass of about 100,000 m☉ and are named direct collapse black holes . 
[ 58 ] a 2022 computer simulation showed that the first supermassive black holes can arise in rare turbulent clumps of gas , called primordial halos , that were fed by unusually strong streams of cold gas . 
the key simulation result was that cold flows suppressed star formation in the turbulent halo until the halo ’ s gravity was finally able to overcome the turbulence and formed two direct-collapse black holes of 31,000 m☉ and 40,000 m☉ . 
the birth of the first smbhs can therefore be a result of standard cosmological structure formation — contrary to what had been thought for almost two decades . [ 59 ] [ 60 ] . 
artists impression of the huge outflow ejected from the quasar sdss j1106+1939 [ 61 ] artists illustration of galaxy with jets from a supermassive black hole . [ 62 ] . 
finally , primordial black holes ( pbhs ) could have been produced directly from external pressure in the first moments after the big bang . 
these black holes would then have more time than any of the above models to accrete , allowing them sufficient time to reach supermassive sizes . 
formation of black holes from the deaths of the first stars has been extensively studied and corroborated by observations . 
the other models for black hole formation listed above are theoretical . 
the formation of a supermassive black hole requires a relatively small volume of highly dense matter having small angular momentum . 
normally , the process of accretion involves transporting a large initial endowment of angular momentum outwards , and this appears to be the limiting factor in black hole growth . 
this is a major component of the theory of accretion disks . 
gas accretion is the most efficient and also the most conspicuous way in which black holes grow . 
the majority of the mass growth of supermassive black holes is thought to occur through episodes of rapid gas accretion , which are observable as active galactic nuclei or quasars . 
observations reveal that quasars were much more frequent when the universe was younger , indicating that supermassive black holes formed and grew early . 
a major constraining factor for theories of supermassive black hole formation is the observation of distant luminous quasars , which indicate that supermassive black holes of billions of m☉ had already formed when the universe was less than one billion years old . 
this suggests that supermassive black holes arose very early in the universe , inside the first massive galaxies . 
[ citation needed ] . 
artists impression of stars born in winds from supermassive black holes . [ 63 ] . 
maximum mass limit [ edit ] . 
there is a natural upper limit to how large supermassive black holes can grow . 
supermassive black holes in any quasar or active galactic nucleus ( agn ) appear to have a theoretical upper limit of physically around 50 billion m☉ for typical parameters , as anything above this slows growth down to a crawl ( the slowdown tends to start around 10 billion m☉ ) and causes the unstable accretion disk surrounding the black hole to coalesce into stars that orbit it . 
[ 20 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] a study concluded that the radius of the innermost stable circular orbit ( isco ) for smbh masses above this limit exceeds the self-gravity radius , making disc formation no longer possible . [ 20 ] . 
a larger upper limit of around 270 billion m☉ was represented as the absolute maximum mass limit for an accreting smbh in extreme cases , for example its maximal prograde spin with a dimensionless spin parameter of a = 1 , [ 67 ] [ 20 ] although the maximum limit for a black holes spin paramater is very slightly lower at a = 0.9982 . 
[ 68 ] at masses just below the limit , the disc luminosity of a field galaxy is likely to be below the eddington limit and not strong enough to trigger the feedback underlying the m–sigma relation , so smbhs close to the limit can evolve above this . 
[ 67 ] it was noted that , however , black holes close to this limit are likely to be rather even rarer , as it would requires the accretion disc to be almost permanently prograde because the black hole grows and the spin-down effect of retrograde accretion is larger than the spin-up by prograde accretion , due to its isco and therefore its lever arm . 
[ 20 ] this would in turn require the hole spin to be permanently correlated with a fixed direction of the potential controlling gas flow within the black holes host galaxy , and thus would tend to produce a spin axis and hence agn jet direction , which is similarly aligned with the galaxy . 
however , current observations do not support this correlation . 
[ 20 ] the so-called chaotic accretion presumably has to involve multiple small-scale events , essentially random in time and orientation if it is not controlled by a large-scale potential in this way . 
[ 20 ] this would lead the accretion statistically to spin-down , due to retrograde events having larger lever arms than prograde , and occurring almost as often . 
[ 20 ] there is also other interactions with large smbhs that trend to reduce their spin , including particularly mergers with other black holes , which can statistically decrease the spin . 
[ 20 ] every of these considerations suggested that smbhs usually cross the critical theoretical mass limit at modest values of their spin parameters , so that 5×1010 m☉ in all but rare cases . [ 20 ] . 
activity and galactic evolution [ edit ] . 
main articles : active galactic nucleus and galaxy formation and evolution . 
gravitation from supermassive black holes in the center of many galaxies is thought to power active objects such as seyfert galaxies and quasars , and the relationship between the mass of the central black hole and the mass of the host galaxy depends upon the galaxy type . 
[ 69 ] [ 70 ] an empirical correlation between the size of supermassive black holes and the stellar velocity dispersion . 
{ \displaystyle \sigma } . 
of a galaxy bulge [ 71 ] is called the m–sigma relation . 
an agn is now considered to be a galactic core hosting a massive black hole that is accreting matter and displays a sufficiently strong luminosity . 
the nuclear region of the milky way , for example , lacks sufficient luminosity to satisfy this condition . 
the unified model of agn is the concept that the large range of observed properties of the agn taxonomy can be explained using just a small number of physical parameters . 
for the initial model , these values consisted of the angle of the accretion disks torus to the line of sight and the luminosity of the source . 
agn can be divided into two main groups : a radiative mode agn in which most of the output is in the form of electromagnetic radiation through an optically thick accretion disk , and a jet mode in which relativistic jets emerge perpendicular to the disk . [ 72 ] . 
the interaction of a pair of smbh-hosting galaxies can lead to merger events . 
dynamic friction on the hosted smbh objects causes them to sink toward the center of the merged mass , eventually forming a pair with a separation of under a kiloparsec . 
the interaction of this pair with surrounding stars and gas will then gradually bring the smbh together as a gravitationally bound binary system with a separation of ten parsecs or less . 
once the pair draw as close as 0.001 parsecs , gravitational radiation will cause them to merge . 
by the time this happens , the resulting galaxy will have long since relaxed from the merger event , with the initial starburst activity and agn having faded away . 
[ 73 ] the gravitational waves from this coalescence can give the resulting smbh a velocity boost of up to several thousand km/s , propelling it away from the galactic center and possibly even ejecting it from the galaxy . [ 74 ] . 
hawking radiation [ edit ] . 
main article : hawking radiation . 
hawking radiation is black-body radiation that is predicted to be released by black holes , due to quantum effects near the event horizon . 
this radiation reduces the mass and energy of black holes , causing them to shrink and ultimately vanish . 
if black holes evaporate via hawking radiation , a non-rotating and uncharged stupendously large black hole with a mass of 1×1011 m☉ will evaporate in around 2.1×10100 years . 
[ 75 ] [ 16 ] black holes formed during the predicted collapse of superclusters of galaxies in the far future with 1×1014 m☉ would evaporate over a timescale of up to 2.1×10109 years . [ 76 ] [ 16 ] . 
evidence [ edit ] . 
doppler measurements [ edit ] . 
simulation of a side view of a black hole with transparent toroidal ring of ionized matter according to a proposed model [ 77 ] for sgr a * . 
this image shows the result of bending of light from behind the black hole , and it also shows the asymmetry arising by the doppler effect from the extremely high orbital speed of the matter in the ring . 
some of the best evidence for the presence of black holes is provided by the doppler effect whereby light from nearby orbiting matter is red-shifted when receding and blue-shifted when advancing . 
for matter very close to a black hole the orbital speed must be comparable with the speed of light , so receding matter will appear very faint compared with advancing matter , which means that systems with intrinsically symmetric discs and rings will acquire a highly asymmetric visual appearance . 
this effect has been allowed for in modern computer-generated images such as the example presented here , based on a plausible model [ 77 ] for the supermassive black hole in sgr a * at the center of the milky way . 
however , the resolution provided by presently available telescope technology is still insufficient to confirm such predictions directly . 
what already has been observed directly in many systems are the lower non-relativistic velocities of matter orbiting further out from what are presumed to be black holes . 
direct doppler measures of water masers surrounding the nuclei of nearby galaxies have revealed a very fast keplerian motion , only possible with a high concentration of matter in the center . 
currently , the only known objects that can pack enough matter in such a small space are black holes , or things that will evolve into black holes within astrophysically short timescales . 
for active galaxies farther away , the width of broad spectral lines can be used to probe the gas orbiting near the event horizon . 
the technique of reverberation mapping uses variability of these lines to measure the mass and perhaps the spin of the black hole that powers active galaxies . 
in the milky way [ edit ] . 
inferred orbits of 6 stars around supermassive black hole candidate sagittarius a * at the milky way galactic center [ 78 ] . 
evidence indicates that the milky way galaxy has a supermassive black hole at its center , 26,000 light-years from the solar system , in a region called sagittarius a * [ 79 ] because : . 
the star s2 follows an elliptical orbit with a period of 15.2 years and a pericenter ( closest distance ) of 17 light-hours ( 1.8×1013 m or 120 au ) from the center of the central object . [ 80 ] . 
from the motion of star s2 , the objects mass can be estimated as 4.0 million m☉ , [ 81 ] or about 7.96×1036 kg . 
the radius of the central object must be less than 17 light-hours , because otherwise s2 would collide with it . 
observations of the star s14 [ 82 ] indicate that the radius is no more than 6.25 light-hours , about the diameter of uranus orbit . 
no known astronomical object other than a black hole can contain 4.0 million m☉ in this volume of space . [ 82 ] . 
infrared observations of bright flare activity near sagittarius a * show orbital motion of plasma with a period of 45±15 min at a separation of six to ten times the gravitational radius of the candidate smbh . 
this emission is consistent with a circularized orbit of a polarized hot spot on an accretion disk in a strong magnetic field . 
the radiating matter is orbiting at 30 % of the speed of light just outside the innermost stable circular orbit . [ 83 ] . 
on january 5 , 2015 , nasa reported observing an x-ray flare 400 times brighter than usual , a record-breaker , from sagittarius a * . 
the unusual event may have been caused by the breaking apart of an asteroid falling into the black hole or by the entanglement of magnetic field lines within gas flowing into sagittarius a * , according to astronomers . [ 84 ] . 
detection of an unusually bright x-ray flare from sagittarius a * , a supermassive black hole in the center of the milky way galaxy . 
[ 84 ] sagittarius a * imaged by the event horizon telescope . 
outside the milky way [ edit ] . 
artists impression of a supermassive black hole tearing apart a star . 
below : supermassive black hole devouring a star in galaxy rx j1242−11 – x-ray ( left ) and optical ( right ) . [ 85 ] . 
unambiguous dynamical evidence for supermassive black holes exists only in a handful of galaxies ; [ 86 ] these include the milky way , the local group galaxies m31 and m32 , and a few galaxies beyond the local group , such as ngc 4395 . 
in these galaxies , the root mean square ( or rms ) velocities of the stars or gas rises proportionally to 1/r near the center , indicating a central point mass . 
in all other galaxies observed to date , the rms velocities are flat , or even falling , toward the center , making it impossible to state with certainty that a supermassive black hole is present . 
[ 86 ] nevertheless , it is commonly accepted that the center of nearly every galaxy contains a supermassive black hole . 
[ 87 ] the reason for this assumption is the m–sigma relation , a tight ( low scatter ) relation between the mass of the hole in the 10 or so galaxies with secure detections , and the velocity dispersion of the stars in the bulges of those galaxies . 
[ 88 ] this correlation , although based on just a handful of galaxies , suggests to many astronomers a strong connection between the formation of the black hole and the galaxy itself . [ 87 ] . 
on march 28 , 2011 , a supermassive black hole was seen tearing a mid-size star apart . 
[ 89 ] that is the only likely explanation of the observations that day of sudden x-ray radiation and the follow-up broad-band observations . 
[ 90 ] [ 91 ] the source was previously an inactive galactic nucleus , and from study of the outburst the galactic nucleus is estimated to be a smbh with mass of the order of a million m☉ . 
this rare event is assumed to be a relativistic outflow ( material being emitted in a jet at a significant fraction of the speed of light ) from a star tidally disrupted by the smbh . 
a significant fraction of a solar mass of material is expected to have accreted onto the smbh . 
subsequent long-term observation will allow this assumption to be confirmed if the emission from the jet decays at the expected rate for mass accretion onto a smbh . 
individual studies [ edit ] . 
hubble space telescope photograph of the 4,400 light-year-long relativistic jet of messier 87 , which is matter being ejected by the 6.5×109 m☉ supermassive black hole at the center of the galaxy . 
the nearby andromeda galaxy , 2.5 million light-years away , contains a 1.4+0.65−0.45×108 ( 140 million ) m☉ central black hole , significantly larger than the milky ways . 
[ 92 ] the largest supermassive black hole in the milky ways vicinity appears to be that of messier 87 ( i.e. , m87 * ) , at a mass of ( 6.5±0.7 ) ×109 ( c. 6.5 billion ) m☉ at a distance of 48.92 million light-years . 
[ 93 ] the supergiant elliptical galaxy ngc 4889 , at a distance of 336 million light-years away in the coma berenices constellation , contains a black hole measured to be 2.1+3.5−1.3×1010 ( 21 billion ) m☉ . [ 94 ] . 
masses of black holes in quasars can be estimated via indirect methods that are subject to substantial uncertainty . 
the quasar ton 618 is an example of an object with an extremely large black hole , estimated at 6.6×1010 ( 66 billion ) m☉ . 
[ 95 ] its redshift is 2.219 . 
other examples of quasars with large estimated black hole masses are the hyperluminous quasar apm 08279+5255 , with an estimated mass of 1×1010 ( 10 billion ) m☉ , [ 96 ] and the quasar smss j215728.21-360215.1 , with a mass of ( 3.4±0.6 ) ×1010 ( 34 billion ) m☉ , or nearly 10,000 times the mass of the black hole at the milky ways galactic center . [ 97 ] . 
some galaxies , such as the galaxy 4c +37.11 , appear to have two supermassive black holes at their centers , forming a binary system . 
if they collided , the event would create strong gravitational waves . 
[ 98 ] binary supermassive black holes are believed to be a common consequence of galactic mergers . 
[ 99 ] the binary pair in oj 287 , 3.5 billion light-years away , contains the most massive black hole in a pair , with a mass estimated at 18.348 billion m☉ . 
[ 100 ] [ 101 ] in 2011 , a super-massive black hole was discovered in the dwarf galaxy henize 2-10 , which has no bulge . 
the precise implications for this discovery on black hole formation are unknown , but may indicate that black holes formed before bulges . [ 102 ] . 
a gas cloud with several times the mass of the earth is accelerating towards a supermassive black hole at the centre of the milky way . 
in 2012 , astronomers reported an unusually large mass of approximately 17 billion m☉ for the black hole in the compact , lenticular galaxy ngc 1277 , which lies 220 million light-years away in the constellation perseus . 
the putative black hole has approximately 59 percent of the mass of the bulge of this lenticular galaxy ( 14 percent of the total stellar mass of the galaxy ) . 
[ 103 ] another study reached a very different conclusion : this black hole is not particularly overmassive , estimated at between 2 and 5 billion m☉ with 5 billion m☉ being the most likely value . 
[ 104 ] on february 28 , 2013 , astronomers reported on the use of the nustar satellite to accurately measure the spin of a supermassive black hole for the first time , in ngc 1365 , reporting that the event horizon was spinning at almost the speed of light . [ 105 ] [ 106 ] . 
in september 2014 , data from different x-ray telescopes have shown that the extremely small , dense , ultracompact dwarf galaxy m60-ucd1 hosts a 20 million solar mass black hole at its center , accounting for more than 10 % of the total mass of the galaxy . 
the discovery is quite surprising , since the black hole is five times more massive than the milky ways black hole despite the galaxy being less than five-thousandths the mass of the milky way . 
some galaxies lack any supermassive black holes in their centers . 
although most galaxies with no supermassive black holes are very small , dwarf galaxies , one discovery remains mysterious : the supergiant elliptical cd galaxy a2261-bcg has not been found to contain an active supermassive black hole of at least 1010 m☉ , despite the galaxy being one of the largest galaxies known ; over six times the size and one thousand times the mass of the milky way . 
despite that , several studies gave very large mass values for a possible central black hole inside a2261-bgc , such as about as large as 6.5+10.9−4.1×1010 m☉ or as low as ( 6–11 ) ×109 m☉ . 
since a supermassive black hole will only be visible while it is accreting , a supermassive black hole can be nearly invisible , except in its effects on stellar orbits . 
this implies that either a2261-bgc has a central black hole that is accreting at a low level or has a mass rather below 1010 m☉ . [ 107 ] . 
in december 2017 , astronomers reported the detection of the most distant quasar known by this time , ulas j1342+0928 , containing the most distant supermassive black hole , at a reported redshift of z = 7.54 , surpassing the redshift of 7 for the previously known most distant quasar ulas j1120+0641 . [ 108 ] [ 109 ] [ 110 ] . 
supermassive black hole and smaller black hole in galaxy oj 287comparisons of large and small black holes in galaxy oj 287 to the solar systemblack hole disk flares in galaxy oj 287 ( 1:22 ; animation ; 28 april 2020 ) . 
the supermassive black hole of neve 1 is responsible for the ophiuchus supercluster eruption – the most energetic eruption ever detected.from : chandra x-ray observatory . 
in february 2020 , astronomers reported the discovery of the ophiuchus supercluster eruption , the most energetic event in the universe ever detected since the big bang . 
[ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] it occurred in the ophiuchus cluster in the galaxy neve 1 , caused by the accretion of nearly 270 million m☉ of material by its central supermassive black hole . 
the eruption lasted for about 100 million years and released 5.7 million times more energy than the most powerful gamma-ray burst known . 
the eruption released shock waves and jets of high-energy particles that punched the intracluster medium , creating a cavity about 1.5 million light-years wide – ten times the milky ways diameter . [ 114 ] [ 111 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] . 
in february 2021 , astronomers released , for the first time , a very high-resolution image of 25,000 active supermassive black holes , covering four percent of the northern celestial hemisphere , based on ultra-low radio wavelengths , as detected by the low-frequency array ( lofar ) in europe . [ 117 ] . 
see also [ edit ] . 
black holes in fiction – science fiction themepages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback . 
central massive object – central object of a galaxy . 
galactic center – rotational center of the milky way galaxy . 
galactic center gev excess – unexplained gamma-ray radiation in the center of the milky way galaxy . 
general relativity – theory of gravitation as curved spacetime . 
hypercompact stellar system – cluster of stars around a supermassive black holepages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback . 
list of most massive black holes . 
spin-flip – sudden change of spin axis caused by merging with another black hole . 
notes [ edit ] . 
^ the acronym sbh is commonly used for stellar-mass black hole . 
references [ edit ] . 
^ overbye , dennis ( april 10 , 2019 ) . 
black hole picture revealed for the first time – astronomers at last have captured an image of the darkest entities in the cosmos – comments . 
the new york times . 
retrieved april 10 , 2019. . 
^ a b the event horizon telescope collaboration ( april 10 , 2019 ) . 
first m87 event horizon telescope results . 
the shadow of the supermassive black hole . 
the astrophysical journal letters . 
875 ( 1 ) : l1 . 
^ falcke , heino ; melia , fulvio ; agol , eric ( january 1 , 2000 ) . 
viewing the shadow of the black hole at the galactic center . 
the astrophysical journal . 
528 ( 1 ) : l13–l16 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/9912263 . 
^ a b kormendy , john ; richstone , douglas ( 1995 ) , inward bound—the search for supermassive black holes in galactic nuclei , annual review of astronomy and astrophysics , 33 : 581 , bibcode:1995ara & a.33.581k , doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.33.090195.003053 . 
^ kormendy , john ; ho , luis ( 2013 ) . 
coevolution ( or not ) of supermassive black holes and host galaxies . 
annual review of astronomy and astrophysics . 
51 ( 1 ) : 511–653 . 
bibcode:2013ara & a.51.511k . 
^ ghez , a. ; klein , b. ; morris , m. ; becklin , e ( 1998 ) . 
high proper-motion stars in the vicinity of sagittarius a * : evidence for a supermassive black hole at the center of our galaxy . 
the astrophysical journal . 
509 ( 2 ) : 678–686 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/9807210 . 
schödel , r. ; et al . 
( 2002 ) . 
a star in a 15.2-year orbit around the supermassive black hole at the centre of the milky way . 
419 ( 6908 ) : 694–696 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0210426 . 
^ frank , juhan ; king , andrew ; raine , derek j . 
( january 2002 ) . 
accretion power in astrophysics : third edition . 
accretion power in astrophysics . 
cambridge , uk : cambridge university press . 
^ overbye , dennis ( may 12 , 2022 ) . 
has the milky ways black hole come to light ? 
- the event horizon telescope reaches again for a glimpse of the unseeable . 
the new york times . 
retrieved may 12 , 2022. . 
^ black hole | cosmos . 
retrieved august 29 , 2020. . 
^ kutner , marc l. ( 2003 ) , astronomy : a physical perspective , cambridge university press , p. 149 , isbn 978-0521529273. . 
^ problem 138 : the intense gravity of a black hole , space math @ nasa : mathematics problems about black holes , nasa , retrieved december 4 , 2018. . 
^ celotti , a. ; miller , j.c. ; sciama , d.w. ( 1999 ) . 
astrophysical evidence for the existence of black holes . 
( submitted manuscript ) . 
16 ( 12a ) : a3–a21 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/9912186 . 
^ ehsan , baaquie belal ; hans , willeboordse frederick ( 2015 ) , exploring the invisible universe : from black holes to superstrings , world scientific , p. 200 , bibcode:2015eiub.book.b , isbn 978-9814618694. . 
^ uranus fact sheet . 
retrieved august 29 , 2020. . 
^ a b c black hole calculator – fabio pacucci ( harvard university & sao ) . 
retrieved august 29 , 2020. . 
^ natarajan , priyamvada ; treister , ezequiel ( 2009 ) . 
is there an upper limit to black hole masses ? . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
393 ( 3 ) : 838–845 . 
^ |title=from super to ultra : just how big can black holes get ? . 
^ massive black holes dwell in most galaxies , according to hubble census . 
retrieved august 21 , 2022. . 
^ a b c d e f g h i j king , andrew ( 2016 ) . 
how big can a black hole grow ? . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
456 ( 1 ) : l109–l112 . 
^ inayoshi , kohei ; haiman , zoltán ( september 12 , 2016 ) . 
is there a maximum mass for black holes in galactic nuclei ? . 
the astrophysical journal . 
828 ( 2 ) : 110. arxiv:1601.02611 . 
^ schmidt , maarten ( 1965 ) , 3c 273 : a star-like object with large red-shift , in robinson , ivor ; schild , alfred ; schucking , e.l . 
) , quasi-stellar sources and gravitational collapse , proceedings of the 1st texas symposium on relativistic astrophysics , quasi-stellar sources and gravitational collapse , chicago : university of chicago press , p. 455 , bibcode:1965qssg.conf.455s . 
^ greenstein , jesse l. ; schmidt , maarten ( july 1964 ) , the quasi-stellar radio sources 3c 48 and 3c 273 , astrophysical journal , 140 : 1 , bibcode:1964apj.140.1g , doi:10.1086/147889 , s2cid 123147304. . 
^ feynman , richard ( 2018 ) , feynman lectures on gravitation , crc press , p. 12 , isbn 978-0429982484. . 
^ appenzeller , i. ; fricke , k. ( april 1972 ) , hydrodynamic model calculations for supermassive stars i . 
the collapse of a nonrotating 0.75×106 m☉ star , astronomy and astrophysics , 18 : 10 , bibcode:1972a & a.18.10a . 
^ a b lang , kenneth r. ( 2013 ) , astrophysical formulae : space , time , matter and cosmology , astronomy and astrophysics library ( 3 ed . 
) , springer , p. 217 , isbn 978-3662216392. . 
^ ryle , martin , sir ; longair , m. s. ( 1967 ) , a possible method for investigating the evolution of radio galaxies , monthly notices of the royal astronomical society , 136 ( 2 ) : 123 , bibcode:1967mnras.136.123r , doi:10.1093/mnras/136.2.123 . 
^ wolfe , a. m. ; burbidge , g. r. ( august 1970 ) . 
black holes in elliptical galaxies . 
161 : 419 . 
^ sargent , w. l. w. ; et al . 
( may 1 , 1978 ) . 
dynamical evidence for a central mass concentration in the galaxy m87 . 
astrophysical journal , part 1 . 
221 : 731–744 . 
^ schödel , r. ; genzel , r. ( 2006 ) , alfaro , emilio javier ; perez , enrique ; franco , josé ( eds . 
) , how does the galaxy work ? 
: a galactic tertulia with don cox and ron reynolds , astrophysics and space science library , vol . 
315 , springer science & business media , p. 201 , isbn 978-1402026201. . 
^ fulvio melia ( 2007 ) . 
the galactic supermassive black hole . 
princeton university press . 
^ harms , richard j. ; et al . 
( november 1994 ) , hst fos spectroscopy of m87 : evidence for a disk of ionized gas around a massive black hole , astrophysical journal , part 2 , 435 ( 1 ) : l35–l38 , bibcode:1994apj.435l.35h , doi:10.1086/187588 . 
^ miyoshi , makoto ; et al . 
( january 1995 ) . 
evidence for a black hole from high rotation velocities in a sub-parsec region of ngc4258 . 
373 ( 6510 ) : 127–129 . 
^ tanaka , y. ; nandra , k. ; fabian , a.c. ( 1995 ) . 
gravitationally redshifted emission implying an accretion disk and massive black hole in the active galaxy mcg-6-30-15 . 
375 ( 6533 ) : 659–661 . 
^ overbye , dennis ( march 28 , 2020 ) . 
infinite visions were hiding in the first black hole images rings – scientists proposed a technique that would allow us to see more of the unseeable . 
the new york times . 
retrieved march 29 , 2020. . 
^ johnson , michael d. ; et al . 
( march 18 , 2020 ) . 
universal interferometric signatures of a black holes photon ring . 
6 ( 12 , eaaz1310 ) : eaaz1310 . 
^ overbye , dennis ( march 28 , 2020 ) . 
infinite visions were hiding in the first black hole images rings . 
the new york times . 
retrieved august 31 , 2020. . 
^ kulier , andrea ; ostriker , jeremiah p. ; natarajan , priyamvada ; lackner , claire n. ; cen , renyue ( february 1 , 2015 ) . 
understanding black hole mass assembly via accretion and mergers at late times in cosmological simulations . 
the astrophysical journal . 
799 ( 2 ) : 178. arxiv:1307.3684 . 
^ pacucci , fabio ; loeb , abraham ( june 1 , 2020 ) . 
separating accretion and mergers in the cosmic growth of black holes with x-ray and gravitational-wave observations . 
the astrophysical journal . 
895 ( 2 ) : 95. arxiv:2004.07246 . 
^ a b begelman , m. c. ; et al . 
( june 2006 ) . 
formation of supermassive black holes by direct collapse in pre-galactic haloed . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
370 ( 1 ) : 289–298 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0602363 . 
^ harrison tasoff ( january 19 , 2021 ) . 
researchers discover the earliest supermassive black hole and quasar in the universe . 
the presence of such a massive black hole so early in the universes history challenges theories of black hole formation . 
as lead author [ feige ] wang , now a nasa hubble fellow at the university of arizona , explains : black holes created by the very first massive stars could not have grown this large in only a few hundred million years . 
^ landau , elizabeth ; bañados , eduardo ( december 6 , 2017 ) . 
found : most distant black hole . 
retrieved december 6 , 2017 . 
this black hole grew far larger than we expected in only 690 million years after the big bang , which challenges our theories about how black holes form , said study co-author daniel stern of nasas jet propulsion laboratory in pasadena , california . 
^ balberg , shmuel ; shapiro , stuart l. ( 2002 ) . 
gravothermal collapse of self-interacting dark matter halos and the origin of massive black holes . 
physical review letters . 
88 ( 10 ) : 101301. arxiv : astro-ph/0111176 . 
^ pollack , jason ; spergel , david n. ; steinhardt , paul j . 
( 2015 ) . 
supermassive black holes from ultra-strongly self-interacting dark matter . 
the astrophysical journal . 
804 ( 2 ) : 131. arxiv:1501.00017 . 
^ feng , w.-x . 
; yu , h.-b . 
; zhong , y.-m. ( 2021 ) . 
seeding supermassive black holes with self-interacting dark matter : a unified scenario with baryons . 
the astrophysical journal letters . 
914 ( 2 ) : l26 . 
^ seidel , jamie ( december 7 , 2017 ) . 
black hole at the dawn of time challenges our understanding of how the universe was formed . 
news corp australia . 
retrieved december 9 , 2017 . 
it had reached its size just 690 million years after the point beyond which there is nothing . 
the most dominant scientific theory of recent years describes that point as the big bang—a spontaneous eruption of reality as we know it out of a quantum singularity . 
but another idea has recently been gaining weight : that the universe goes through periodic expansions and contractions—resulting in a big bounce . 
and the existence of early black holes has been predicted to be a key telltale as to whether or not the idea may be valid . 
this one is very big . 
to get to its size—800 million times more mass than our sun—it must have swallowed a lot of stuff . 
as far as we understand it , the universe simply wasnt old enough at that time to generate such a monster . 
^ a black hole that is more ancient than the universe ( in greek ) . 
you magazine ( greece ) . 
december 8 , 2017 . 
retrieved december 9 , 2017 . 
this new theory that accepts that the universe is going through periodic expansions and contractions is called big bounce . 
^ spitzer , l. ( 1987 ) . 
dynamical evolution of globular clusters . 
princeton university press . 
^ boekholt , t. c. n. ; schleicher , d. r. g. ; fellhauer , m. ; klessen , r. s. ; reinoso , b. ; stutz , a. m. ; haemmerlé , l. ( may 1 , 2018 ) . 
formation of massive seed black holes via collisions and accretion . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
476 ( 1 ) : 366–380 . 
^ saplakoglu , yasemin ( september 29 , 2017 ) . 
zeroing in on how supermassive black holes formed . 
retrieved april 8 , 2019. . 
^ johnson-goh , mara ( november 20 , 2017 ) . 
cooking up supermassive black holes in the early universe . 
retrieved april 8 , 2019. . 
^ pasachoff , jay m. ( 2018 ) . 
^ yue , bin ; ferrara , andrea ; salvaterra , ruben ; xu , yidong ; chen , xuelei ( may 1 , 2014 ) . 
the brief era of direct collapse black hole formation . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
440 ( 2 ) : 1263–1273 . 
^ sugimura , kazuyuki ; omukai , kazuyuki ; inoue , akio k. ( november 1 , 2014 ) . 
the critical radiation intensity for direct collapse black hole formation : dependence on the radiation spectral shape . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
445 ( 1 ) : 544–553 . 
^ bromm , volker ; loeb , abraham ( october 1 , 2003 ) . 
formation of the first supermassive black holes . 
the astrophysical journal . 
596 ( 1 ) : 34–46 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0212400 . 
^ siegel , ethan . 
direct collapse black holes may explain our universes mysterious quasars . 
retrieved august 28 , 2020. . 
^ montero , pedro j. ; janka , hans-thomas ; müller , ewald ( april 1 , 2012 ) . 
relativistic collapse and explosion of rotating supermassive stars with thermonuclear effects . 
the astrophysical journal . 
749 ( 1 ) : 37. arxiv:1108.3090 . 
^ habouzit , mélanie ; volonteri , marta ; latif , muhammad ; dubois , yohan ; peirani , sébastien ( november 1 , 2016 ) . 
on the number density of direct collapse black hole seeds . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
463 ( 1 ) : 529–540 . 
^ revealing the origin of the first supermassive black holes . 
july 6 , 2022. doi:10.1038/d41586-022-01560-y . 
state-of-the-art computer simulations show that the first supermassive black holes were born in rare , turbulent reservoirs of gas in the primordial universe without the need for finely tuned , exotic environments — contrary to what has been thought for almost two decades . 
^ scientists discover how first quasars in universe formed . 
provided by university of portsmouth . 
july 6 , 2022 . 
retrieved august 2 , 2022. . 
^ biggest black hole blast discovered . 
eso press release . 
retrieved november 28 , 2012. . 
^ artists illustration of galaxy with jets from a supermassive black hole . 
hubble space telescope . 
retrieved november 27 , 2018. . 
^ stars born in winds from supermassive black holes – esos vlt spots brand-new type of star formation . 
retrieved march 27 , 2017. . 
^ trosper , jaime ( may 5 , 2014 ) . 
is there a limit to how large black holes can become ? . 
retrieved november 27 , 2018. . 
^ clery , daniel ( december 21 , 2015 ) . 
limit to how big black holes can grow is astonishing . 
retrieved november 27 , 2018. . 
^ black holes could grow as large as 50 billion suns before their food crumbles into stars , research shows . 
university of leicester . 
retrieved november 27 , 2018. . 
^ a b carr , bernard ; et al . 
( february 2021 ) . 
constraints on stupendously large black holes . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
501 ( 2 ) : 2029–2043 . 
^ kovács , zoltán ; gergely , lászlóá . 
; biermann , peter l. ( 2011 ) . 
maximal spin and energy conversion efficiency in a symbiotic system of black hole , disc and jet . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
416 ( 2 ) : 991–1009 . 
^ savorgnan , giulia a.d. ; graham , alister w. ; marconi , alessandro ; sani , eleonora ( 2016 ) . 
supermassive black holes and their host spheroids . 
the red and blue sequence in the mbh-m * , sph diagram . 
817 ( 1 ) : 21. arxiv:1511.07437 . 
^ sahu , nandini ; graham , alister w. ; davis , benjamin l. ( 2019 ) . 
black hole mass scaling relations for early-type galaxies . 
i. mbh-m * , sph and mbh-m * , gal . 
876 ( 2 ) : 155. arxiv:1903.04738 . 
^ gultekin k ; et al . 
( 2009 ) . 
the m—σ and m-l relations in galactic bulges , and determinations of their intrinsic scatter . 
the astrophysical journal . 
698 ( 1 ) : 198–221 . 
^ netzer , hagai ( august 2015 ) . 
revisiting the unified model of active galactic nuclei . 
annual review of astronomy and astrophysics . 
53 : 365–408 . 
bibcode:2015ara & a.53.365n . 
^ tremmel , m. ; et al . 
( april 2018 ) . 
dancing to changa : a self-consistent prediction for close smbh pair formation time-scales following galaxy mergers . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
475 ( 4 ) : 4967–4977 . 
^ komossa , s. ( 2012 ) . 
recoiling black holes : electromagnetic signatures , candidates , and astrophysical implications . 
advances in astronomy . 
2012 : 364973. arxiv:1202.1977 . 
^ page , don n. ( 1976 ) . 
particle emission rates from a black hole : massless particles from an uncharged , nonrotating hole . 
physical review d. 13 ( 2 ) : 198–206 . 
see in particular equation ( 27 ) . 
^ frautschi , s ( 1982 ) . 
entropy in an expanding universe . 
217 ( 4560 ) : 593–599 . 
s2cid 27717447. p. 596 : table 1 and section black hole decay and previous sentence on that page : since we have assumed a maximum scale of gravitational binding – for instance , superclusters of galaxies – black hole formation eventually comes to an end in our model , with masses of up to 1014 m☉ . 
the timescale for black holes to radiate away all their energy ranges . 
to 10106 years for black holes of up to 1014 m☉ . 
^ a b straub , o. ; vincent , f. h. ; abramowicz , m. a. ; gourgoulhon , e. ; paumard , t. ( 2012 ) . 
modelling the black hole silhouette in sgr a * with ion tori . 
astronomy & astrophysics . 
543 : a83 . 
^ eisenhauer , f. ; et al . 
( 2005 ) . 
sinfoni in the galactic center : young stars and infrared flares in the central light-month . 
the astrophysical journal . 
628 ( 1 ) : 246–259 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0502129 . 
^ henderson , mark ( december 9 , 2008 ) . 
astronomers confirm black hole at the heart of the milky way . 
retrieved may 17 , 2009. . 
^ schödel , r. ; et al . 
( october 17 , 2002 ) . 
a star in a 15.2-year orbit around the supermassive black hole at the centre of the milky way . 
419 ( 6908 ) : 694–696 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0210426 . 
^ event horizon telescope collaboration ; et al . 
( 2022 ) . 
first sagittarius a * event horizon telescope results . 
the shadow of the supermassive black hole in the center of the milky way . 
the astrophysical journal letters . 
930 ( 2 ) : l12 . 
^ a b ghez , a. m. ; salim , s. ; hornstein , s. d. ; tanner , a. ; lu , j. r. ; morris , m. ; becklin , e. e. ; duchêne , g. ( may 2005 ) . 
stellar orbits around the galactic center black hole . 
the astrophysical journal . 
620 ( 2 ) : 744–757 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0306130 . 
^ gravity collaboration ; et al . 
( october 2018 ) . 
detection of orbital motions near the last stable circular orbit of the massive black hole sgra * . 
astronomy & astrophysics . 
618 : 15. arxiv:1810.12641 . 
bibcode:2018a & a.618l.10g . 
^ a b chou , felicia ; anderson , janet ; watzke , megan ( january 5 , 2015 ) . 
release 15-001 – nasas chandra detects record-breaking outburst from milky ways black hole . 
retrieved january 6 , 2015. . 
^ chandra : : photo album : : rx j1242-11 : : 18 feb 04. chandra.harvard.edu . 
^ a b merritt , david ( 2013 ) . 
dynamics and evolution of galactic nuclei . 
princeton , new jersey : princeton university press . 
^ a b king , andrew ( september 15 , 2003 ) . 
black holes , galaxy formation , and the mbh-σ relation . 
the astrophysical journal letters . 
596 ( 1 ) : l27–l29 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0308342 . 
^ ferrarese , laura ; merritt , david ( august 10 , 2000 ) . 
a fundamental relation between supermassive black holes and their host galaxies . 
the astrophysical journal . 
539 ( 1 ) : l9–12 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0006053 . 
^ astronomers catch first glimpse of star being consumed by black hole . 
the sydney morning herald . 
august 26 , 2011. . 
^ burrows , d. n. ; kennea , j . 
a. ; ghisellini , g. ; mangano , v. ; et al . 
( august 2011 ) . 
relativistic jet activity from the tidal disruption of a star by a massive black hole . 
476 ( 7361 ) : 421–424 . 
^ zauderer , b . 
a. ; berger , e. ; soderberg , a. m. ; loeb , a. ; et al . 
( august 2011 ) . 
birth of a relativistic outflow in the unusual γ-ray transient swift j164449.3+573451 . 
476 ( 7361 ) : 425–428 . 
^ al-baidhany , ismaeel a. ; chiad , sami s. ; jabbar , wasmaa a. ; al-kadumi , ahmed k. ; habubi , nadir f. ; mansour , hazim l. ( 2020 ) . 
determine the mass of supermassive black hole in the centre of m31 in different methods . 
international conference of numerical analysis and applied mathematics icnaam 2019 . 
vol . 2293 . 
p. 050050. doi:10.1063/5.0027838 . 
^ the event horizon telescope collaboration ( april 10 , 2019 ) . 
first m87 event horizon telescope results . 
the shadow and mass of the central black hole ( pdf ) . 
the astrophysical journal . 
875 ( 1 ) : l6 . 
^ dullo , b.t . 
( november 22 , 2019 ) . 
the most massive galaxies with large depleted cores : structural parameter relations and black hole masses . 
the astrophysical journal . 
886 ( 2 ) : 80. arxiv:1910.10240 . 
^ shemmer , o. ; netzer , h. ; maiolino , r. ; oliva , e. ; croom , s. ; corbett , e. ; di fabrizio , l. ( 2004 ) . 
near-infrared spectroscopy of high-redshift active galactic nuclei . 
a metallicity-accretion rate relationship . 
the astrophysical journal . 
614 ( 2 ) : 547–557 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0406559 . 
^ saturni , f. g. ; trevese , d. ; vagnetti , f. ; perna , m. ; dadina , m. ( 2016 ) . 
a multi-epoch spectroscopic study of the bal quasar apm 08279+5255 . 
emission- and absorption-line variability time lags . 
astronomy and astrophysics . 
587 : a43 . 
bibcode:2016a & a.587a.43s . 
^ christopher a onken ; fuyan bian ; xiaohui fan ; feige wang ; christian wolf ; jinyi yang ( august 2020 ) , thirty-four billion solar mass black hole in smss j2157–3602 , the most luminous known quasar , monthly notices of the royal astronomical society , 496 ( 2 ) : 2309 , arxiv:2005.06868 , bibcode:2020mnras.496.2309o , doi:10.1093/mnras/staa1635 . 
^ major , jason ( october 3 , 2012 ) . 
watch what happens when two supermassive black holes collide . 
retrieved june 4 , 2013. . 
^ merritt , d. ; milosavljevic , m. ( 2005 ) . 
massive black hole binary evolution . 
archived from the original on march 30 , 2012 . 
retrieved march 3 , 2012. . 
^ shiga , david ( january 10 , 2008 ) . 
biggest black hole in the cosmos discovered . 
^ valtonen , m. j. ; ciprini , s. ; lehto , h. j . 
( 2012 ) . 
on the masses of oj287 black holes . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
427 ( 1 ) : 77–83 . 
^ kaufman , rachel ( january 10 , 2011 ) . 
huge black hole found in dwarf galaxy . 
retrieved june 1 , 2011. . 
^ van den bosch , remco c. e. ; gebhardt , karl ; gültekin , kayhan ; van de ven , glenn ; van der wel , arjen ; walsh , jonelle l. ( 2012 ) . 
an over-massive black hole in the compact lenticular galaxy ngc 1277 . 
491 ( 7426 ) : 729–731 . 
^ emsellem , eric ( 2013 ) . 
is the black hole in ngc 1277 really overmassive ? . 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
433 ( 3 ) : 1862–1870 . 
^ reynolds , christopher ( 2013 ) . 
astrophysics : black holes in a spin . 
494 ( 7438 ) : 432–433 . 
^ prostak , sergio ( february 28 , 2013 ) . 
astronomers : supermassive black hole in ngc 1365 spins at nearly light-speed . 
retrieved march 20 , 2015. . 
^ gültekin , kayhan ; burke-spolaor , sarah ; lauer , tod r. ; w. lazio , t. joseph ; moustakas , leonidas a. ; ogle , patrick ; postman , marc ( 2021 ) . 
chandra observations of abell 2261 brightest cluster galaxy , a candidate host to a recoiling black hole . 
the astrophysical journal . 
906 ( 1 ) : 48. arxiv:2010.13980 . 
^ bañados , eduardo ; et al . 
( december 6 , 2017 ) . 
an 800-million-solar-mass black hole in a significantly neutral universe at a redshift of 7.5 . 
553 ( 7689 ) : 473–476 . 
^ landau , elizabeth ; bañados , eduardo ( december 6 , 2017 ) . 
found : most distant black hole . 
retrieved december 6 , 2017. . 
^ choi , charles q . 
( december 6 , 2017 ) . 
oldest monster black hole ever found is 800 million times more massive than the sun . 
retrieved december 6 , 2017. . 
^ a b overbye , dennis ( march 6 , 2020 ) . 
this black hole blew a hole in the cosmos – the galaxy cluster ophiuchus was doing just fine until wisea j171227.81-232210.7 — a black hole several billion times as massive as our sun — burped on it . 
the new york times . 
retrieved march 6 , 2020. . 
^ biggest cosmic explosion ever detected left huge dent in space . 
february 27 , 2020 . 
retrieved march 6 , 2020. . 
^ astronomers detect biggest explosion in the history of the universe . 
february 27 , 2020 . 
retrieved march 6 , 2020. . 
^ giacintucci , s. ; markevitch , m. ; johnston-hollitt , m. ; wik , d. r. ; wang , q. h. s. ; clarke , t. e. ( february 27 , 2020 ) . 
discovery of a giant radio fossil in the ophiuchus galaxy cluster . 
the astrophysical journal . 
891 ( 1 ) : 1. arxiv:2002.01291 . 
^ biggest cosmic explosion ever detected left huge dent in space . 
february 27 , 2020 . 
retrieved march 6 , 2020. . 
^ astronomers detect biggest explosion in the history of the universe . 
february 27 , 2020 . 
retrieved march 6 , 2020. . 
^ starr , michelle ( february 22 , 2021 ) . 
the white dots in this image are not stars or galaxies . 
theyre black holes . 
retrieved february 22 , 2021. . 
further reading [ edit ] . 
fulvio melia ( 2003 ) . 
the edge of infinity . 
supermassive black holes in the universe . 
cambridge university press . 
laura ferrarese & david merritt ( 2002 ) . 
supermassive black holes . 
15 ( 1 ) : 41–46 . 
arxiv : astro-ph/0206222 . 
merritt , david ( 2013 ) . 
dynamics and evolution of galactic nuclei . 
princeton university press . 
julian krolik ( 1999 ) . 
active galactic nuclei . 
princeton university press . 
chakraborty , amlan ; chanda , prolay k. ; pandey , kanhaiya lal ; das , subinoy ( 2022 ) . 
formation and abundance of late-forming primordial black holes as dark matter . 
the astrophysical journal . 
932 ( 2 ) : 119. arxiv:2204.09628 . 
carr , bernard ; kühnel , florian ( 2022 ) . 
primordial black holes as dark matter candidates . 
scipost physics lecture notes . 
external links [ edit ] . 
listen to this article ( 22 minutes ) . 
this audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 20 march 2017 ( 2017-03-20 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits . 
( audio help · more spoken articles ) . 
wikinews has news related to : . 
supermassive black holes . 
black holes : gravitys relentless pull award-winning interactive multimedia web site about the physics and astronomy of black holes from the space telescope science institute . 
images of supermassive black holes . 
nasa images of supermassive black holes . 
the black hole at the heart of the milky way . 
eso video clip of stars orbiting a galactic black hole . 
star orbiting massive milky way centre approaches to within 17 light-hours eso , october 21 , 2002 . 
images , animations , and new results from the ucla galactic center group . 
washington post article on supermassive black holes . 
video ( 2:46 ) – simulation of stars orbiting milky ways central massive black hole . 
video ( 2:13 ) – simulation reveals supermassive black holes ( nasa , october 2 , 2018 ) . 
september 2020 , paul sutter 29 ( september 29 , 2020 ) . 
black holes so big we dont know how they form could be hiding in the universe . 
retrieved february 6 , 2021. vteblack holes . 
btz black hole . 
active galactic nucleus . 
binary black hole . 
dark matter star . 
innermost stable circular orbit . 
boussos holographic bound . 
black hole complementarity . 
er = epr . 
final parsec problem . 
firewall ( physics ) . 
schwarzschild ( derivation ) . 
nonsingular black hole models . 
magnetospheric eternally collapsing object . 
optical black hole . 
sonic black hole . 
outline of black holes . 
black hole initiative . 
black hole starship . 
gamma-ray burst progenitors . 
hypercompact stellar system . 
rossi x-ray timing explorer . 
timeline of black hole physics . 
tidal disruption event . 
sagittarius a * . 
centaurus a. phoenix cluster . 
vtemilky waylocationmilky way → milky way subgroup → local group → local sheet → virgo supercluster → laniakea supercluster → kbc void → observable universe → universeeach arrow ( → ) may be read as within or part of.structuregalactic center . 
sagittarius a. sagittarius a * . 
supermassive black hole . 
near 3 kpc arm . 
far 3 kpc arm . 
palomar 5 stream . 
large magellanic cloud . 
small magellanic cloud . 
boötes i. boötes ii . 
canes venatici i. canes venatici ii . 
leo i. leo ii . 
leo v. leo t. phoenix . 
ursa major i. ursa major ii . 
virgo i. willman 1 . 
andromeda–milky way collision . 
zone of avoidance . 
portals : physics stars outer space science . 
retrieved from https : //en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php ? title=supermassive_black_hole & oldid=1139729223 . 
categories : galaxiessupermassive black holesblack holesconcepts in astronomyhidden categories : cs1 greek-language sources ( el ) articles with short descriptionshort description is different from wikidatause mdy dates from march 2020wikipedia articles in need of updating from november 2022all wikipedia articles in need of updatingall articles with unsourced statementsarticles with unsourced statements from november 2022pages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback via module : annotated linkarticles with haudio microformatsspoken articlesarticles containing video clips . 
this page was last edited on 16 february 2023 , at 16:27 ( utc ) . 
text is available under the creative commons attribution-sharealike license 3.0 ; . 
additional terms may apply . 
by using this site , you agree to the terms of use and privacy policy . 
wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the wikimedia foundation , inc. , a non-profit organization . 
the science of interstellar : black holes , wormholes and space travel | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
the science of interstellar : black holes , wormholes and space travel . 
by mike wall published 10 november 2014 . 
a theatrical poster for the 2014 film interstellar shows the spaceship endurance flying through a wormhole . 
( image credit : paramount pictures ) . 
the sci-fi epic interstellar is just a movie , but it throws a lot of science on the screen for space geeks to sink their teeth into.interstellar , which opened in theaters across the united states on friday ( nov. 7 ) , delves into black holes and wormholes , and it touches down on more than one alien planet . 
the film apparently takes its science seriously ; renowned theoretical physicist kip thorne served as an adviser and executive producer on interstellar.heres a look at some of the space-science concepts that play key roles in the film , which was directed by christopher nolan and stars matthew mcconaughey , anne hathaway , jessica chastain and michael caine . 
caution : some spoilers ahead . 
[ interstellar : a space epic in pictures ] journey through a wormholewormhole travel across the universe and supergiant black holes are just some of the wonders seen in the film interstellar . 
see how the science of interstellar works in this infographic . 
( image credit : by karl tate , infographics artist ) interstellar is set at some nebulous point in the not-too-distant future , when global crop failures threaten humanity with extinction . 
so a small band of explorers , led by a pilot-turned-farmer named cooper ( mcconaughey ) , blasts off to search for an exoplanet that could serve as a new home for the human race.the astronauts are aided in their quest by a wormhole — a sort of tunnel that allows relatively quick travel between widely separated parts of the universe — which had mysteriously appeared near saturn some years before . 
cooper steers the pioneers ship , called endurance , through the wormhole into a planet-rich portion of a faraway galaxy.though wormholes are a favored sci-fi trope , nobody knows whether or not they actually exist . 
according to einsteins theory of general relativity , they are possible , but no sign of them has ever been spotted.furthermore , scientists say , a wormhole would likely collapse quickly unless it was propped open using some kind of negative-energy matter . 
so the big wormhole in interstellar would require some serious and exotic engineering work — but ill stop here , so i dont give too much away about the film.the interstellar visual-effects team used equations provided by thorne to come up with their representation of the wormhole , depicting its entrance as a shimmering sphere — just as it likely would look in real life , thorne said.neither wormholes nor black holes have been depicted in any hollywood movie in the way that they actually would appear , thorne said recently in an interstellar science video produced by wired magazine . 
this is the first time the depiction began with einsteins general relativity equations.a gorgeous black holemuch of the action in interstellar revolves around a giant black hole , which cooper and his crewmates call gargantua . 
thorne said he and the visual-effects crew took a great deal of care to depict the light-gobbling monster accurately.the on-screen result is an exotic object that twists its infalling disk of dust and gas into complex shapes , with the overall effect further complicated by gravitational lensing — a real astronomical phenomenon in which a massive foreground object ( such as a black hole ) warps the light emitted by stars and other bodies located much farther away . 
[ images : black holes of the universe ] the collaboration between thorne and the interstellar visual-effects people was so successful that it will extend into the scientific literature , the physicist said.were going to write several technical papers about this — one aimed at the astrophysics community , and then something for the computer-graphics community — saying , here are some things weve discovered about gravitational lensing by rapidly spinning black holes that we never knew before , thorne said in the wired video.a few quibblesin the film interstellar , astronauts use a variety of spacecraft to cross the universe and explore alien worlds . 
see how they work in this space.com infographic . 
( image credit : by karl tate , infographics artist ) in the movie , however , cooper and his crew spend some time in close proximity to the black hole , which strains credulity.the astronauts would likely be killed by the energetic radiation thrown off by the superhot disk of material circling gargantua , roberto trotta , an astrophysicist at imperial college london , noted in an article for the british newspaper the guardian . 
or theyd be spaghettified by the intense gravitional pull , which would be much stronger at one end of their bodies than the other , trotta added.and thats not the only issue . 
the astronauts land on a world that orbits very close to gargantua — so close that , as the film depicts it , for every hour spent on the exoplanets surface , seven years elapse on earth . 
such time dilation does indeed occur in the presence of gravitational fields , but theres no way it could be so extreme , according to trotta.you would need such a strong gravitational field that you need to be close to what is called the schwarzschild radius of the object — essentially the event horizon of a black hole , he wrote in the guardian . 
( the event horizon is the point beyond which nothing , not even light , can escape a black holes clutches . ) 
there is simply no planet that can have this kind of gravity , and if you tried to land on the surface , it would be so strong it would crush you . 
the numbers simply do not work.in fact , a planet so close to a black hole could not even exist , trotta observed : tidal forces generated by the black holes immense gravity would tear the planet apart.a visual spectaclesuch details will rankle some filmgoers , while other folks wont mind suspending their disbelief . 
but most people who see interstellar will probably agree that its a stunning visual spectacle.one of the alien planets depicted in the film , for example , is a water world featuring mysterious gigantic waves , while another is a frigid realm whose clouds are frozen solid . 
these worlds are gorgeously rendered , as are the many spaceflight sequences throughout the movie.the spaceships in interstellar are also nicely conceived and designed . 
endurance is a ring-shaped vehicle consisting of 12 boxy modules , some of which can be shuttled to the surface of an exoplanet to set up a base . 
the mothership carries two heavy-lift landers to perform this work , as well as two more-agile rangers , which the crew uses for planetary exploration.and endurance rotates 5.6 times per minute to generate earth-equivalent gravity aboard the ship — a detail the sticklers in the audience will doubtless appreciate.follow mike wall on twitter @ michaeldwall and google+ . 
follow us @ spacedotcom , facebook or google+ . 
originally published on space.com . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
mike wallsocial links navigationsenior space writermichael wall is a senior space writer with space.com . 
and joined the team in 2010 . 
he primarily covers exoplanets , spaceflight and military space , but has been known to dabble in the space art beat . 
his book about the search for alien life , out there , was published on nov. 13 , 2018 . 
before becoming a science writer , michael worked as a herpetologist and wildlife biologist . 
he has a ph.d. in evolutionary biology from the university of sydney , australia , a bachelors degree from the university of arizona , and a graduate certificate in science writing from the university of california , santa cruz . 
to find out what his latest project is , you can follow michael on twitter . 
more from space.1black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy2pictures from space ! 
our image of the day3nasas heartbeat-detecting tech to help with turkey earthquake relief effort4nasa names moon mountain after black mathematician and hidden figure melba mouton5astronomers unravel how complex organic molecules form in deep space . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
what exactly is a black hole event horizon ( and what happens there ) ? 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
what exactly is a black hole event horizon ( and what happens there ) ? . 
by charles q. choi published 9 april 2019 . 
a visualization from a supercomputer simulation shows how positrons behave near the event horizon of a rotating black hole . 
( image credit : kyle parfrey et al./berkeley lab ) . 
on wednesday ( april 10 ) , the international event horizon telescope project will release the first results from its plan to image black holes . 
but what exactly is an event horizon ? the event horizon of a black hole is linked to the objects escape velocity — the speed that one would need to exceed to escape the black holes gravitational pull . 
the closer someone came to a black hole , the greater the speed they would need to escape that massive gravity . 
the event horizon is the threshold around the black hole where the escape velocity surpasses the speed of light . 
according to einsteins theory of special relativity , nothing can travel faster through space than the speed of light . 
this means a black holes event horizon is essentially the point from which nothing can return . 
the name refers to the impossibility of witnessing any event taking place inside that border , the horizon beyond which one can not see.related : groundbreaking result coming soon from event horizon telescope the event horizon is the ultimate prison wall — one can get in but never get out , avi loeb , chair of astronomy at harvard university , told space.com.when an item gets near an event horizon , a witness would see the items image redden and dim as gravity distorted light coming from that item . 
at the event horizon , this image would effectively fade to invisibility.within the event horizon , one would find the black holes singularity , where previous research suggests all of the objects mass has collapsed to an infinitely dense extent . 
this means the fabric of space and time around the singularity has also curved to an infinite degree , so the laws of physics as we currently know them break down . 
the event horizon protects us from the unknown physics near a singularity , loeb said . 
related : images : black holes of the universe the size of an event horizon depends on the black holes mass . 
if earth were compressed until it became a black hole , it would have a diameter of about 0.69 inches ( 17.4 millimeters ) , a little smaller than a dime ; if the sun were converted to a black hole , it would be about 3.62 miles ( 5.84 kilometers ) wide , about the size of a village or town . 
the supermassive black holes that the event horizon telescope is observing are far larger ; sagittarius a * , at the center of the milky way , is about 4.3 million times the mass of our sun and has a diameter of about 7.9 million miles ( 12.7 million km ) , while m87 at the heart of the virgo a galaxy is about 6 billion solar masses and 11 billion miles ( 17.7 billion km ) wide.the strength of a black holes gravitational pull depends on the distance from it — the closer you are , the more powerful the tug . 
but the effects of this gravity on a visitor would differ depending on the black holes mass . 
if you fell toward a relatively small black hole a few times the mass of the sun , for example , you would get pulled apart and stretched out in a process known as spaghettification , dying well before you reached the event horizon . 
however , if you were to fall toward a supermassive black hole millions to billions of times the mass of the sun , you wouldnt feel such forces to a significant degree , loeb said . 
you would not die of spaghettification before you crossed the event horizon ( although numerous other hazards around such a black hole might kill you before you reached that point ) .black holes likely spin because the stars they generally originate from also spun and because the matter they swallow whirled in spirals before it fell in . 
recent findings suggest that black holes can rotate at speeds greater than 90 percent that of light , loeb said.related : black hole quiz : how well do you know natures weirdest creations ? previously , the most basic model of black holes assumed they did not spin , and so their singularities were assumed to be points . 
but because black holes generally rotate , current models suggest their singularities are infinitely thin rings . 
this leads the event horizons of rotating black holes , also known as kerr black holes , to appear oblong — squashed at the poles and bulging at their equators.a rotating black holes event horizon separates into an outer horizon and an inner horizon . 
the outer event horizon of such an object acts like a point of no return , just like the event horizon of a nonrotating black hole . 
the inner event horizon of a rotating black hole , also known as the cauchy horizon , is stranger . 
past that threshold , cause no longer necessarily precedes effect , the past no longer necessarily determines the future , and time travel may be possible . 
( in a nonrotating black hole , also known as a schwarzschild black hole , the inner and outer horizons coincide . 
) a spinning black hole also forces the fabric of space-time around it to rotate with it , a phenomenon known as frame dragging or the lense-thirring effect . 
frame dragging is also seen around other massive bodies , including earth.frame dragging creates a cosmic whirlpool known as the ergosphere , which occurs outside a rotating black holes outer event horizon . 
any object within the ergosphere is forced to move in the same direction in which the black hole is spinning . 
matter falling into the ergosphere can get enough speed to escape the black holes gravitational pull , taking some of the black holes energy with it . 
in this manner , black holes can have powerful effects on their surroundings.rotation can also make black holes more effective at converting any matter that falls into them into energy . 
a nonrotating black hole would convert about 5.7 percent of an infalling objects mass into energy , following einsteins famous equation e = mc^2 . 
in contrast , a rotating black hole could convert up to 42 percent of an objects mass into energy , scientists have determinedrelated : the strangest black holes in the universethis has important implications for the environments around black holes , loeb said . 
the amount of energy from the supermassive black holes at the centers of virtually all large galaxies can significantly influence the evolution of those galaxies.recent work has greatly upset the conventional view of black holes . 
in 2012 , physicists suggested that anything falling toward a black hole might encounter firewalls at or in the vicinity of the event horizon that would incinerate any matter falling in . 
this is because when particles collide , they can become invisibly connected through a link called entanglement , and black holes could break such links , releasing incredible amounts of energy.however , other research seeking to unite general relativity , which can explain the nature of gravity , with quantum mechanics , which can describe the behavior of all known particles , suggests that firewalls may not exist — because event horizons themselves may not exist . 
some physicists suggest that instead of abysses from which nothing can return , what we currently think of as black holes may actually be a range of black-hole-like objects that lack event horizons , such as so-called fuzzballs , loeb said.by imaging the edges of black holes , the event horizon telescope can help scientists analyze the shapes and behaviors of event horizons . 
we can use these images to constrain any theory on the structure of black holes , loeb said . 
indeed , the fuzzball speculation — where the event horizon is not a sharp boundary , but is rather fuzzy — could be tested with images from the event horizon telescope.astronomers to peer into a black hole for 1st time with event horizon telescopethis huge black hole is spinning at half the speed of light ! 8 baffling astronomy mysteriesfollow charles q. choi on twitter @ cqchoi . 
follow us on twitter . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom or facebook . . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
charles q. choisocial links navigationcontributing writercharles q. choi is a contributing writer for space.com and live science . 
he covers all things human origins and astronomy as well as physics , animals and general science topics . 
charles has a master of arts degree from the university of missouri-columbia , school of journalism and a bachelor of arts degree from the university of south florida . 
charles has visited every continent on earth , drinking rancid yak butter tea in lhasa , snorkeling with sea lions in the galapagos and even climbing an iceberg in antarctica . 
visit him at http : //www.sciwriter.us . 
more from space.1no indication shot-down objects are alien spacecraft , white house says2russia releases 1st images of damage to leaky soyuz spacecraft ( photos ) 3sphere is 25 and coming to tv soon . 
heres why michael crichtons mind-bending sci-fi tale is still awesome4what are these mystery objects that us fighter jets keep shooting down ? 5spacex to launch 1st saudi woman to space on private ax-2 mission . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
tiny newfound unicorn is closest known black hole to earth | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingmeteorite from european fireball ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
tiny newfound unicorn is closest known black hole to earth . 
by mike wall published 21 april 2021 . 
the unicorn lies a mere 1,500 light-years from us and is just three times more massive than the sun . 
artists illustration of the tiny black hole candidate known as the unicorn tugging on its companion , a red giant star . 
( image credit : ohio state illustration by lauren fanfer ) . 
astronomers have apparently found the closest known black hole to earth , a weirdly tiny object dubbed the unicorn that lurks just 1,500 light-years from us.the nickname has a double meaning . 
not only does the black hole candidate reside in the constellation monoceros ( the unicorn ) , its incredibly low mass — about three times that of the sun — makes it nearly one of a kind.because the system is so unique and so weird , you know , it definitely warranted the nickname of the unicorn , discovery team leader tharindu jayasinghe , an astronomy ph.d. student at the ohio state university , said in a new video the school made to explain the find . 
related : the strangest black holes in the universethe unicorn has a companion — a bloated red giant star thats nearing the end of its life . 
( our sun will swell up as a red giant in about five billion years . ) 
that companion has been observed by a variety of instruments over the years , including the all sky automated survey and nasas transiting exoplanet survey satellite.jayasinghe and his colleagues analyzed that big dataset and noticed something interesting : the red giants light shifts in intensity periodically , suggesting that another object is tugging on the star and changing its shape.the team determined that the object doing the tugging is likely a black hole — one harboring a mere three solar masses , based on details of the stars velocity and the light distortion . 
( for perspective : the supermassive black hole at the heart of our milky way galaxy packs about 4.3 million solar masses . ) 
just as the moons gravity distorts the earths oceans , causing the seas to bulge toward and away from the moon , producing high tides , so does the black hole distort the star into a football-like shape with one axis longer than the other , study co-author todd thompson , chair of ohio states astronomy department , said in a statement . 
the simplest explanation is that its a black hole — and in this case , the simplest explanation is the most likely one.that explanation , likely though it may be , is not set in stone ; the unicorn remains a black hole candidate at the moment . 
very few such super-lightweight black holes are known , because theyre incredibly hard to find . 
black holes famously gobble up everything , including light , so astronomers have traditionally detected them by noticing the impact they have on their surroundings ( though we did recently get our first direct image of a black hole , thanks to the event horizon telescope ) . 
and the smaller the black hole , the smaller the impact . 
but efforts to find extremely low-mass black holes have increased significantly in recent years , thompson said , so we could soon learn much more about these mysterious objects.i think the field is pushing toward this , to really map out how many low-mass , how many intermediate-mass and how many high-mass black holes there are , because every time you find one it gives you a clue about which stars collapse , which explode and which are in between , he said in the statement . 
jayasinghe and his team report the detection of the unicorn in a paper thats been accepted for publication in the journal monthly notices of the royal astronomical society . 
you can read it for free at the online preprint site arxiv.org .mike wall is the author of out there . 
( grand central publishing , 2018 ; illustrated by karl tate ) , a book about the search for alien life . 
follow him on twitter @ michaeldwall . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom or facebook . . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
mike wallsocial links navigationsenior space writermichael wall is a senior space writer with space.com . 
and joined the team in 2010 . 
he primarily covers exoplanets , spaceflight and military space , but has been known to dabble in the space art beat . 
his book about the search for alien life , out there , was published on nov. 13 , 2018 . 
before becoming a science writer , michael worked as a herpetologist and wildlife biologist . 
he has a ph.d. in evolutionary biology from the university of sydney , australia , a bachelors degree from the university of arizona , and a graduate certificate in science writing from the university of california , santa cruz . 
to find out what his latest project is , you can follow michael on twitter . 
more from space.1virgin galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202123 mystery objects shot down by us likely werent spy craft , biden says3black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy4pictures from space ! 
our image of the day5nasas heartbeat-detecting tech to help with turkey earthquake relief effort . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
scientists detect rare crash of two mismatched black holes for the first time ever | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
scientists detect rare crash of two mismatched black holes for the first time ever . 
by meghan bartels published 20 april 2020 . 
this is roughly equal to the ratio of filling in a regular oreo to [ that ] in a mega stuf oreo . 
investigations of connections between oreos and black hole formation are ongoing . 
comments ( 2 ) . 
colliding black holes arent always as evenly matched as scientists expected , according to a cosmic chirp astronomers have puzzled over for a year.on april 12 , 2019 , gravitational wave detectors picked up a signal of space-time ripples caused by colliding black holes — which in and of itself has gone from groundbreaking to nearly mundane over the past five years . 
but as scientists studied the detection more closely , they realized that it didnt match the signals they have seen so far.instead of two evenly matched black holes , the new detection seemed to be triggered by a lopsided merger in which one black hole was three or four times more massive than the other . 
scientists affiliated with the laser interferometer gravitational-wave observatory ( ligo ) announced the discovery . 
april 18 at an online meeting of the american physical society.its an unlikely observation , maya fishbach , a doctoral candidate at the university of chicago who presented the new discovery , said during her talk . 
its an exceptional event because we just wouldnt have expected it based on those first 10 binary black holes.related : eureka ! 
scientists photograph a black hole for the 1st time .an artists depiction of mismatched black holes colliding . 
( image credit : n. fischer , h. pfeiffer , a. buonanno ( max planck institute for gravitational physics ) , simulating extreme spacetimes project ) scientists studied those 10 mergers during ligos first two observing runs , conducted between 2015 and 2017 . 
each time , no matter how big the collision , the two black holes involved were about the same size . 
then , just weeks into ligos third observing run in 2019 , the newly reported signal appeared and turned that trend on its head. “ we had detected several binary black hole mergers before , but never one where the bigger black hole is nearly four times more massive than its companion , frank ohme , a ligo scientist at the max planck institute for gravitational physics in germany , said in a statement . 
it ’ s clear we are just beginning to understand the diversity of black hole binaries out there , and i am excited to decipher the universes secrets every day a little more.the newly announced discovery involved objects about 2.4 billion light-years away , fishbach said , with one black hole about eight times the mass of our sun and the other about 30 times the mass of our sun.this is roughly equal to the ratio of filling in a regular oreo to [ that ] in a mega stuf oreo , christopher berry , a gravitational-wave scientist at northwestern university , wrote in a blog post . 
about the detection . 
( dont get too excited : investigations of connections between oreos and black hole formation are ongoing , he added . 
) the detection gives scientists a better understanding of how black holes pair up . 
we are learning that systems of this kind exist and how rare they are , giancarlo cella , researcher at istituto nazionale di fisica nucleare in italy and the data analysis coordinator for ligos european counterpart virgo , said in a statement . 
this will allow us to deduce how they formed.ligos third observing run , which was cut short by the spreading coronavirus pandemic , netted a treasure trove of more than 50 detections , fishbach said . 
scientists are still analyzing those observations , so other unbalanced mergers could be hiding in that data . 
but even just the one asymmetric merger dramatically reshapes the range of black hole pairs scientists are now prepared to expect.this one event represents a big step forward in our understanding of the population , fishbach said.the new research is described in a paper . 
posted on april 18 by the ligo collaboration but not yet published or peer-reviewed . 
why are black holes so weird ? 
ask a spaceman explains in new episode all your questions about the new black hole image answered weird black hole physics revealed in nasa visualization email meghan bartels at mbartels @ space.com or follow her @ meghanbartels . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . 
.offer : save 45 % on all about space how it works and all about history ! . 
for a limited time , you can take out a digital subscription to any of our best-selling science magazines for just $ 2.38 per month , or 45 % off the standard price for the first three months.view deal . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
meghan bartelssocial links navigationsenior writermeghan is a senior writer at space.com and has more than five years experience as a science journalist based in new york city . 
she joined space.com in july 2018 , with previous writing published in outlets including newsweek and audubon . 
meghan earned an ma in science journalism from new york university and a ba in classics from georgetown university , and in her free time she enjoys reading and visiting museums . 
follow her on twitter at @ meghanbartels . 
see all comments ( 2 ) . 
comment from the forums . 
an observation at high significance , meaning the mass difference likely is real . 
despite that they see a large in-plane ( i think ) spin ( which was easier than in equal mass mergers ) of the larger black hole , they cant reject that it was a merger between pristine black holes . 
else the hierarchical merger - the larger black hole already being a merger result - looks interesting ! 
a birth place in a dense cluster with some trinary star systems is a possibility . 
the mass asymmetry meant odd overtones in the gravity wave spectra , so they could test general relativity theory further than ever before - it still works perfectly well ! . 
i note this from the space.com article , the newly announced discovery involved objects about 2.4 billion light-years away , fishbach said , with one black hole about eight times the mass of our sun and the other about 30 times the mass of our sun . 
however , another report indicates the distance is spread 1.9 to 2.9 billion light-years , ligo and virgo detectors catch first gravitational wave from binary black hole merger with unequal masses , gw190412 was observed by both ligo detectors and the virgo detector on 12th of april 2019 , early during the detectors third observation run o3 . 
analyses reveal that the merger happened at a distance of 1.9 to 2.9 billion light-years from earth . 
the new unequal mass system is a unique discovery since all binaries observed previously by the ligo and virgo detectors consisted of two roughly similar masses . 
distance is important when determining masses , etc . 
view all 2 comments . 
more from space.1watch debut launch of japans powerful new h3 rocket on tuesday2no indication shot-down objects are alien spacecraft , white house says3russia releases 1st images of damage to leaky soyuz spacecraft ( photos ) 4sphere is 25 and coming to tv soon . 
heres why michael crichtons mind-bending sci-fi tale is still awesome5what are these mystery objects that us fighter jets keep shooting down ? . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
something weird is happening to the black hole at the center of the milky way | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingmeteorite from european fireball ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
something weird is happening to the black hole at the center of the milky way . 
by meghan bartels last updated 11 may 2022 . 
an artists depiction of a black hole at the center of a galaxy . 
( image credit : nasa/jpl-caltech ) . 
astronomers have been watching the black hole at the center of our galaxy for 20 years , and in may , they saw something theyd never seen before.well , technically , they arent watching the black hole itself , which scientists call sagittarius a * , or sgr a * . 
instead , theyre looking at the matter around that black hole . 
when the milky ways black hole is more active than usual , that event horizon becomes brighter as it heats up due to friction . 
usually , sgr a * is pretty calm for a black hole , but in may , that changed , according to new research.the black hole is always variable , but this was the brightest weve seen in the infrared so far , tuan do , an astronomer at the university of california , los angeles , and lead author of the new study , said on twitter . 
it was probably even brighter before we started observing that night ! related : eureka ! 
scientists photograph a black hole for the 1st timethat hypothesis is based on the fact that , when the astronomers focused on the area on may 13 , they only saw relatively high brightness decreasing , suggesting that the black hole had passed an unknown peak that was even brighter . 
according to the new paper , the recent flare brought sgr a * to twice the brightness of the highest previous measurement to date.do and his colleagues made the observations using the keck telescopes on the summit of mauna kea in hawaii . 
that instrument can see the world in near infrared light , which encompasses wavelengths a bit longer than those our eyes can see.heres a timelapse of images over 2.5 hr from may from @ keckobservatory of the supermassive black hole sgr a * . 
the black hole is always variable , but this was the brightest weve seen in the infrared so far . 
it was probably even brighter before we started observing that night ! 
pic.twitter.com/mwxioz7twvaugust 11 , 2019see morethey think the black-hole flare may have been caused by the close passage of either a star called s0-2 last year or a dusty object called g2 in 2014.the scientists hope more observations of sgr a * will help them sort out what the massive black hole is doing . 
those observations include measurements made overnight on aug. 13 and 14 after a hiatus due to protests at mauna kea.related : the strangest black holes in the universeother instruments , including the spitzer and chandra space telescopes and ground-based instruments , have pointed to sgr a * on and off throughout the past few months , although those data have yet to be analyzed . 
art-xc , a new russian space telescope that launched about a month ago , also has turned its eye on the black hole despite still being in its calibration period.the black hole is also the target of the globe-spanning event horizon telescope , a collaboration that published the first image of a black hole in april . 
the historic image was of the black hole at the heart of a galaxy called m87 , but the scientists are also working on processing data about sgr a * .the original observations are described in a paper posted to the preprint server arxiv.org on aug. 5 that was recently accepted for publication in the astrophysical journal letters.the future of black hole photography : whats next for the event horizon telescopeno escape : dive into a black hole ( infographic ) why are black holes so weird ? email meghan bartels at mbartels @ space.com or follow her @ meghanbartels . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
meghan bartelssocial links navigationsenior writermeghan is a senior writer at space.com and has more than five years experience as a science journalist based in new york city . 
she joined space.com in july 2018 , with previous writing published in outlets including newsweek and audubon . 
meghan earned an ma in science journalism from new york university and a ba in classics from georgetown university , and in her free time she enjoys reading and visiting museums . 
follow her on twitter at @ meghanbartels . 
more from space.1japans new h3 rocket aborts 1st-ever launch attempt2virgin galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202133 mystery objects shot down by us likely werent spy craft , biden says4black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy5pictures from space ! 
our image of the day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
the milky ways monster black hole has a cool gas halo — literally | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
the milky ways monster black hole has a cool gas halo — literally . 
by charles q. choi last updated 11 may 2022 . 
this artists impression shows a ring of cool interstellar gas around the supermassive black hole at the center of the milky way , sagittarius a * . 
( image credit : nrao/aui/nsf ; s. dagnello ) . 
for the first time , astronomers may have imaged the cool disk of gas surrounding the gigantic black hole at the heart of the milky way , a new study finds.the research may improve knowledge about how black holes grow and influence their surroundings.at the hearts of most , if not all , galaxies are supermassive black holes millions to billions of times the mass of the sun . 
these enormous structures can have profound effects on the galaxies they call home — for example , they can blast out jets of matter at nearly the speed of light that can travel across an entire galaxy , likely shaping the galaxys evolution.related : the strangest black holes in the universe the location of the black hole at the center of the milky way , sagittarius a . 
( image credit : f. baganoff et al./nasa/cxc/mit ) at the center of our galaxy lies the supermassive black hole sagittarius a * , often abbreviated sgr a * . 
this giant is about 4 million times the mass of the sun and about 14.6 million miles ( 23.6 million kilometers ) in diameter.around sgr a * swirls a ring of debris known as an accretion disk . 
the gas within this disk experiences so much friction that it can reach 18 million degrees fahrenheit ( 10 million degrees celsius ) , according to researchers on the new study . 
previous research has detected x-rays near sgr a * , likely given off from this hot gas.prior research suggests that sgr a * was also surrounded by relatively cool gas , with temperatures ranging from about minus 280 degrees f to 17,500 degrees f ( minus 170 degrees c to 10,000 degrees c ) . 
however , it remains uncertain how much cool gas surrounded sgr a * .if we want to learn about what processes are important and not important for how a black hole gets fed , we need to know the environment around the black hole well , study lead author elena murchikova , an astrophysicist at the institute for advanced study in princeton , new jersey , told space.com . 
but the contribution of cool gas on a black hole has never been studied.now murchikova and her colleagues suggest that they may have imaged the cool accretion disk around sgr a * for the first time . 
this should help improve our understanding of how accretion onto black holes works , she said.scientists used the atacama large millimeter/submillimeter array ( alma ) in chile to analyze the center of the milky way . 
specifically , they focused on wavelengths of light given off by hot ionized hydrogen gas that could make it all the way from the heart of the galaxy to earth , with very little loss of these light signals along the way.an image from alma shows cool hydrogen gas flowing around the milky way centers supermassive black hole , sagittarius a * . 
the red portion of the gas is moving away from earth and the blue portion is moving toward earth . 
the crosshairs show the location of the black hole . 
( image credit : alma ( eso/naoj/nrao ) , e.m. murchikova ; nrao/aui/nsf , s. dagnello ) the researchers detected a disk of cool gas about 20,000 times the diameter of sgr a * , and estimated it was about one-tenth the mass of jupiter , or about 30 times the mass of earth . 
future research should aim for higher-resolution images of the cool gas around black holes , and how this gas interacts with hot gas around black holes , murchikova said . 
we want to find out as much of what is going on around a black hole as possible , she noted.the scientists detailed their findings . 
online june 5 in the journal nature.physicists closer to solving mystery of weird glowing ring around milky ways black holemilky ways monster black hole belches big , but why ? the future of black hole photography : whats next for the event horizon telescopefollow charles q. choi on twitter @ cqchoi . 
follow us on twitter @ spacedotcom and on facebook . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
charles q. choisocial links navigationcontributing writercharles q. choi is a contributing writer for space.com and live science . 
he covers all things human origins and astronomy as well as physics , animals and general science topics . 
charles has a master of arts degree from the university of missouri-columbia , school of journalism and a bachelor of arts degree from the university of south florida . 
charles has visited every continent on earth , drinking rancid yak butter tea in lhasa , snorkeling with sea lions in the galapagos and even climbing an iceberg in antarctica . 
visit him at http : //www.sciwriter.us . 
more from space.1us shoots down ufo over canada2the sun just erupted with a major x-class solar flare . 
heres what it looked like on video.3black history is american history : nasa celebrates african americans and space achievements at smithsonian event4cracks on plutos moon charon may be evidence of a frozen subsurface ocean5the james webb space telescope catches distant young galaxy devouring its neighbors . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
interstellar visual effects team publishes black hole study | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
interstellar visual effects team publishes black hole study . 
by mike wall published 13 february 2015 . 
the supermassive black hole gargantua plays a major role in the 2014 sci-fi blockbuster interstellar . 
( image credit : paramount pictures ) . 
the special effects that power the sci-fi blockbuster interstellar are helping researchers better understand supermassive black holes and other real-world cosmic phenomena.the interstellar visual-effects crew has published a scientific study describing the computer code that brought to life the wormhole and enormous black hole , dubbed gargantua , that played central roles in the film.the study , which came out today ( feb. 13 ) in the journal classical and quantum gravity , details how the computer code — called double negative gravitational renderer , or dngr — helped construct a scientifically accurate view of gargantua , by mapping out how millions of light beams travel through the warped space-time surrounding the black hole . 
[ the science of interstellar explained ( infographic ) ] the interstellar team discovered early on that the traditional way to create an onscreen black hole produced an odd flickering as stars and other objects moved about . 
so they tried something new.to get rid of the flickering and produce realistically smooth pictures for the movie , we changed our code in a manner that has never been done before , study lead author oliver james , chief scientist at england-based special effects firm double negative , said in a statement . 
instead of tracing the paths of individual light rays using einstein ’ s equations — one per pixel — we traced the distorted paths and shapes of light beams.‪this new approach to making images will be of great value to astrophysicists like me , said co-author kip thorne , a renowned astrophysicist who served as an adviser and executive producer of the film . 
we , too , need smooth images.james , thorne and their colleagues also used dngr to better understand how strange , crinkly space-time surfaces called caustics affect images of distant stars as seen by a camera or observer close to a fast-spinning black hole.a light beam emitted from any point on a caustic surface gets focused by the black hole into a bright cusp of light at a given point , james said.all of the caustics , except one , wrap around the sky many times when the camera is close to the black hole , he added . 
this sky-wrapping is caused by the black hole ’ s spin , dragging space into a whirling motion around itself like the air in a whirling tornado , and stretching the caustics around the black hole many times.you can read the new paper for free here.interstellar , which was released in november 2014 , centers on a small band of explorers that sets out to find a new home for humanity , whose existence on earth is threatened by global crop failures . 
this crew , led by a former farmer named cooper , journeys to another galaxy via a wormhole that mysteriously appeared near saturn . 
( the effects team used dngr to visualize the wormhole as well . 
) the film was directed by christopher nolan , and it stars matthew mcconaughey , anne hathaway , jessica chastain and michael caine.follow mike wall on twitter @ michaeldwall and google+ . 
follow us @ spacedotcom , facebook or google+ . 
originally published on space.com . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
mike wallsocial links navigationsenior space writermichael wall is a senior space writer with space.com . 
and joined the team in 2010 . 
he primarily covers exoplanets , spaceflight and military space , but has been known to dabble in the space art beat . 
his book about the search for alien life , out there , was published on nov. 13 , 2018 . 
before becoming a science writer , michael worked as a herpetologist and wildlife biologist . 
he has a ph.d. in evolutionary biology from the university of sydney , australia , a bachelors degree from the university of arizona , and a graduate certificate in science writing from the university of california , santa cruz . 
to find out what his latest project is , you can follow michael on twitter . 
more from space.1mini astrobiology laser could join hunt for life on mars and beyond2chelyabinsk meteor explosion over russia 10 years ago was a planetary defense wakeup call3heres how chinas astronauts keep fit aboard tiangong space station ( video ) 4virgin orbit traces failed uk rocket launch to dislodged fuel filter5star trek annual 2023 is a holodeck trip through trek history . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
hubblesite : black holes : gravitys relentless pull interactive : encyclopedia . 
black holes : gravitys relentless pull . 
javascript must be installed and turned on in your browser to view content on most pages of this site , including journey to a black hole . 
.if you experience other problems , verify that your setup matches the technical requirements for this site . 
how do black holes grow ? . 
black holes grow in mass by capturing nearby material . 
anything that enters the event horizon can not escape the black holes gravity . 
so objects that do not keep a . 
.safe distance get swallowed . 
despite their reputation , black holes will not actually suck in objects from large distances . 
a black hole can only capture objects that come very close . 
theyre more like venus flytraps than cosmic vacuum cleaners . 
for example , imagine replacing the sun by a black hole of the same mass . 
.would fall on earth , but the planets would continue to revolve around the black hole at the same distance and speed as they do now . 
none of the planets would be . 
.sucked into the black hole . 
our earth would be in danger only if it came within some 10 miles of the black hole , much less than the actual distance of earth . 
.from the sun ( a comforting 93 million miles ) . 
the diet of known black holes consists mostly of gas and dust , which fill the otherwise empty space throughout the universe . 
black holes can also consume . 
.material torn from nearby stars . 
in fact , the most massive black holes can swallow stars whole . 
black holes can also grow by colliding and merging with other . 
this growth process is what can reveal the presence of a black hole . 
as gas falls toward a black hole , it is heated to high temperatures , generating . 
.powerful radio waves and x-rays that can be studied by astronomers . 
the following pages showcase the supermassive black holes in the centers of two distant galaxies that reveal their presence through their very powerful . 
.radio waves and x-rays : . 
cygnus a ( elliptical galaxy ) . 
3c 273 ( quasar ) . 
gas that falls into a black hole settles into a so-called accretion disk . 
friction and magnetic fields in the disk cause the gas to heat and emit x-rays . 
black holes | science mission directorate . 
skip to main content . 
nasa science mission directorate . 
share the science . 
ask a question . 
science topicsuniversesolar systemsunearthspace experimentsmissionsscience-enabling technologylunar discovery and explorationscience activationnewsscience @ nasapress releaseswatchsciencecastswe asked a nasa expertnasa science liveez sciencefor researchersoverviewfaqsolicitationssmd bridge programroses blognac science committeenasa postdoc programteampi resourcesscience datahelp & supportsuborbital programuaplearnersoverviewteamsresourcessme mapopportunitiesnewshighlightshotlinespace placeget involvednasa science at homeart and scienceupcoming eventsconnectemail sign upfollow usresourcestoolkitsvisual presentations citizen scienceprojectshighlightspublicationsnasa citizen scientistsabout usoverviewleadershippeopleresourcesscience strategyworkforce initiativescareersideaconnectcommunicationscontact usespañolscience in spanish . 
learn more about this image . 
what we study . 
what we study . 
dark energy , dark matter . 
the big bang . 
dont let the name fool you : a black hole is anything but empty space . 
rather , it is a great amount of matter packed into a very small area - think of a star ten times more massive than the sun squeezed into a sphere approximately the diameter of new york city . 
the result is a gravitational field so strong that nothing , not even light , can escape . 
in recent years , nasa instruments have painted a new picture of these strange objects that are , to many , the most fascinating objects in space . 
intense x-ray flares thought to be caused by a black hole devouring a star . 
( video ) . 
watch the video . 
the idea of an object in space so massive and dense that light could not escape it has been around for centuries . 
most famously , black holes were predicted by einsteins theory of general relativity , which showed that when a massive star dies , it leaves behind a small , dense remnant core . 
if the cores mass is more than about three times the mass of the sun , the equations showed , the force of gravity overwhelms all other forces and produces a black hole . 
a video about black holes . 
watch the video . 
scientists cant directly observe black holes with telescopes that detect x-rays , light , or other forms of electromagnetic radiation . 
we can , however , infer the presence of black holes and study them by detecting their effect on other matter nearby . 
if a black hole passes through a cloud of interstellar matter , for example , it will draw matter inward in a process known as accretion . 
a similar process can occur if a normal star passes close to a black hole . 
in this case , the black hole can tear the star apart as it pulls it toward itself . 
as the attracted matter accelerates and heats up , it emits x-rays that radiate into space . 
recent discoveries offer some tantalizing evidence that black holes have a dramatic influence on the neighborhoods around them - emitting powerful gamma ray bursts , devouring nearby stars , and spurring the growth of new stars in some areas while stalling it in others . 
one stars end is a black holes beginning . 
most black holes form from the remnants of a large star that dies in a supernova explosion . 
( smaller stars become dense neutron stars , which are not massive enough to trap light . ) 
if the total mass of the star is large enough ( about three times the mass of the sun ) , it can be proven theoretically that no force can keep the star from collapsing under the influence of gravity . 
however , as the star collapses , a strange thing occurs . 
as the surface of the star nears an imaginary surface called the event horizon , time on the star slows relative to the time kept by observers far away . 
when the surface reaches the event horizon , time stands still , and the star can collapse no more - it is a frozen collapsing object . 
astronomers have identified a candidate for the smallest-known black hole . 
( video ) . 
watch the video . 
even bigger black holes can result from stellar collisions . 
soon after its launch in december 2004 , nasas swift telescope observed the powerful , fleeting flashes of light known as gamma ray bursts . 
chandra and nasas hubble space telescope later collected data from the events afterglow , and together the observations led astronomers to conclude that the powerful explosions can result when a black hole and a neutron star collide , producing another black hole . 
babies and giants . 
although the basic formation process is understood , one perennial mystery in the science of black holes is that they appear to exist on two radically different size scales . 
on the one end , there are the countless black holes that are the remnants of massive stars . 
peppered throughout the universe , these stellar mass black holes are generally 10 to 24 times as massive as the sun . 
astronomers spot them when another star draws near enough for some of the matter surrounding it to be snared by the black holes gravity , churning out x-rays in the process . 
most stellar black holes , however , are very difficult to detect . 
judging from the number of stars large enough to produce such black holes , however , scientists estimate that there are as many as ten million to a billion such black holes in the milky way alone . 
on the other end of the size spectrum are the giants known as supermassive black holes , which are millions , if not billions , of times as massive as the sun . 
astronomers believe that supermassive black holes lie at the center of virtually all large galaxies , even our own milky way . 
astronomers can detect them by watching for their effects on nearby stars and gas . 
this chart shows the relative masses of super-dense cosmic objects . 
read the full article . 
historically , astronomers have long believed that no mid-sized black holes exist . 
however , recent evidence from chandra , xmm-newton and hubble strengthens the case that mid-size black holes do exist . 
one possible mechanism for the formation of supermassive black holes involves a chain reaction of collisions of stars in compact star clusters that results in the buildup of extremely massive stars , which then collapse to form intermediate-mass black holes . 
the star clusters then sink to the center of the galaxy , where the intermediate-mass black holes merge to form a supermassive black hole . 
december 20 , 2022 . 
nasa gets unusual close glimpse of black hole snacking on star . 
november 23 , 2022 . 
ixpe helps solve black hole jet mystery . 
november 21 , 2022 . 
listen to the light echoes from a black hole . 
november 10 , 2022 . 
magnetic fields help black holes reach deeper into galaxies . 
november 3 , 2022 . 
ixpe reveals shape , orientation of hot matter around black hole . 
october 13 , 2022 . 
swift , fermi missions detect exceptional cosmic blast . 
august 18 , 2022 . 
nasa telescopes capture stellar delivery service for black hole ( ngc 4424 ) . 
june 30 , 2022 . 
chandra shows giant black hole spins slower than its peers ( h1821+243 ) . 
june 10 , 2022 . 
hubble determines mass of isolated black hole roaming our milky way galaxy . 
may 12 , 2022 . 
nasa telescopes support event horizon telescope in studying milky ways black hole ( sagittarius a * ) . 
may 5 , 2022 . 
swift tracks potential magnetic flip of monster black hole . 
may 4 , 2022 . 
new nasa black hole sonifications with a remix . 
april 20 , 2022 . 
black holes raze thousands of stars to fuel growth . 
april 13 , 2022 . 
hubble sheds light on origins of supermassive black holes . 
april 7 , 2022 . 
fermi hunts for gravitational waves from monster black holes . 
march 31 , 2022 . 
feasting black holes caught in galactic spiderweb ( spiderweb galaxy field ) . 
february 22 , 2022 . 
how magnetic fields help feed a supermassive black hole . 
january 19 , 2022 . 
hubble finds a black hole igniting star formation in a dwarf galaxy . 
january 10 , 2022 . 
mini monster black hole could hold clues to giants growth ( mrk 462 ) . 
december 16 , 2021 . 
astronomers spy quartet of cavities from giant black holes : rbs 797 . 
december 9 , 2021 . 
mini-jet found near milky ways supermassive black hole . 
november 10 , 2021 . 
black holes can tell us the expansion rate of the universe . 
september 16 , 2021 . 
jingle , pluck , and hum : sounds from space . 
august 5 , 2021 . 
huge rings around a black hole ( v404 cygni ) . 
what we study . 
dark energy , dark matterblack holesthe big banggalaxiesstarsexoplanets . 
organization and staff 2020 decadal survey2022 senior review of operating missionsastrophysics fleet mission chart ( pdf ) astronomy picture of the daynight sky networkspacecraft paper models . 
field guide to black holesblack holes : gravitys relentless pullblack hole fact sheet and morelisten to a black hole . 
are we alone in the universe ? 
you ’ re . 
february 14 , 2023 . 
volunteers help discover the reddest . 
february 07 , 2023 . 
the scigirls become disk detectives . 
february 02 , 2023 . 
nasa wants you to help study planets . 
january 11 , 2023 . 
science newsscience at nasa . 
we asked a nasa expert . 
nac science committee . 
nasa postdoc program . 
help & support . 
get involvednasa science at home . 
art and science . 
email sign up . 
nasa citizen scientists . 
nasa official : dana bolles . 
last updated : february 17 , 2023 . 
ask a question . 
science topicsuniverseoverview2020 decadal surveyapd responses to decadalpre 2020 decadal reportslarge missionsprobe missionswhat we studydark energy , dark matterblack holesthe big banggalaxiesstarsexoplanetsprogramsphysics of the cosmoscosmic originsastrophysics explorersexoplanet explorationastrophysics researchastrophysics div technologyastrophysics pioneersmissionsscience questionshow does the universe work ? how did we get here ? are we alone ? astro dataheasarcmastnexscinedirsasimbadadsdocumentsastrophysics roadmapmeeting of expertssolar systemoverviewwhat we studyinner solar systemouter solar systemsmall bodies of the solar systemprogramsdiscoverylunar discovery & explorationmars explorationnew frontiersplanetary defense coordination officeouter planets & ocean worldssmall satssservimissionsscience questionshow did life begin and evolve on earth ? how did the solar system evolve ? how did the suns family originate ? what are the characteristics of the solar system ? documentsplanetary dataoverviewpde elementspde irbstatus updatesarchives/repositoriesopportunitiestraining toolkitsolar systemsunoverviewheliophysics leadershiphelio org chartsmd organization chartprogram officers listwhat we studyprogramsheliophysics researchballoonscubesatssolar terrestrial probesexplorersliving with a starsounding rocketsworking groupscitizen sciencetechnology programchimera : a hybrid search coil and fluxgate magnetometer for small spacecraft missionssolar cruiser : enabling new vistas for heliophysics sciencemissionsspace weatherspace weather strategyspace weather councilgap analysis reportsupplemental informationheliophysics 2024 decadal survey2050 workshopstrategic mission programshelio dataresourcesgeospace dynamics constellationdocuments and reportsmembershippublic commentsearthoverviewwhat we studyelementsflight programresearch and analysis programatmospheric compositionac missionsweatherwad missionsweather and atmospheric dynamics focus area publications and research highlightsour climateoceanographycvc missionsclimate variability & changeel niñoglobal water & energy cyclewec missionscarbon cycle & ecosystemscce missionscarbon cycle and ecosystems focus area publications and research highlightsour surfacea year in review : new earth discoveries in 2018accounting for internal variabilitychanges in global terrestrial water storage cclimate change changing ensoclimate change is speeding up the water cyclecold-intolerant plants are creeping farther northice losses from antarctica have tripled since 2012india overtakes china as top emitter of sulfur dioxidelinking ocean circulation and riverine carbon fluxlocal land subsidence increases flood risk in san francisco baysatellites detect undiscovered penguin populationssea surface salinity could provide new insight into severe stormsseeing the connection between neighboring volcanoes at depthwarm ocean waters off greenland put glaciers at more riska year in review : new earth discoveries in 2019a year in review : new earth discoveries in 2020esi missionsearth science research newsocean physics at nasaselected proposalsapplied sciences programcommon instrument interfacecii guidelines working meetingcii reference documentscii workshop 1cii workshop 2cii workshop 3essp program libraryestomissionsscience questionsearth dataevery day is earth dayresourcesglobal challengesapplications surveyeventsspace experimentsovervieworganizationstaff biosdecadal surveywhat we studyprogramsspace biologyanimal biologyanimal biology : what we studycell & molecular biology programdevelopmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programexperiments - animal biology programexperiments - cell & molecular biology programexperiments - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programexperiments - microbiology programexperiments - plant biology programhardware - animal biology programhardware - cell & molecular biology programhardware - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programhardware - microbiology programhardware - plant biology programmice behavior in space - animal biologymicrobiology programplant biology programpublications - animal biology programpublications - cell & molecular biology programpublications - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programpublications - microbiology programpublications - plant biology programspace biology science digestwhat we study - cell & molecular biology programwhat we study - developmental , reproductive & evolutionary biology programwhat we study - microbiology programwhat we study - plant biology programphysical sciencesbiophysicscombustion sciencefluid physicsfundamental physicslife science flight projectsmaterials sciencestar 2020 participantsstar-2 ( 2021-2022 ) course participantsstar-3 ( 2022-2023 ) course participantssoft mattermissionsinvestigationsdatadocumentscommercialnews & mediawhat are the van allen belts and why do they matter ? missionsscience-enabling technologyoverviewsmd technology programstechnology highlightsoutput and resultsoverviewoverviewworkshop overviewforum agendagoogle docsspeaker presentations & videospeaker presentations & videossteering committeeorganizersspeakers and panelistsquestions & answerslunar discovery and explorationoverviewwhat we studyplanetary processesvolatile cyclesimpact history of earth/moonrecord of the ancient sunbiological systems on the moonphysical sciences on the moonplatform to the universeelementscommercial lunar payload serviceslunar instrument developmentsmallsats and cubesatslunar surface science mobility strategylunar reconnaissance orbiterapollo next generation sample analysisclps deliveriesto2-abto2-imto19cto19dto20a ( viper ) prime-1cp-11cp-12cs-3dataresourcesscience activationnewsscience @ nasapress releaseswatchsciencecastswe asked a nasa expertnasa science liveez sciencefor researchersoverviewnasa science social media consolidation faqfaqsolicitationssmd bridge programquestions and answers for smd bridge program workshop organizing committeeroses blognac science committeeoverviewmeetingsmembersscience advisory committeesastrophysics advisory committeeastrophysics analysis groupsearth science advisory committeeheliophysics advisory committeeplanetary science advisory committeeplanetary science analysis groupsbiological and physical sciences advisory committeeapplied sciences advisory committeesubcommitteesnasa postdoc programteamprogram officers listadvisory committeespi resources2021 virtual launchpad informationaccessibility statementaccessibility statementpi launchpad workshop contentpi launchpad workshop videospi launchpad : developing your first flight mission proposalpi launchpad : pre-application information sessionpi workshop sessionsquestions and answers about the pi launchpad 2021 virtual workshopquestions and answers about the pi launchpad 2023 in-person workshopresourcesscience mission directorate pi launchpad workshopscience datafaq for smd information policyopen-source science initiativeoverviewwhy do open science ? transform to open science ( tops ) smd ai initiativedata and computing architecture studyseries a workshopsseries c workshopsupcoming and past eventsopen-source science workshopoverviewagendacode of conductscience information policyhelp & supporthow to guidesvolunteer for review panelssuborbital programuaplearnersoverviewastrobiology standards alignmentsastrophysics standards alignmentsback to schoolearth science standards alignmentsheliophysics standards alignmentsplanetary science standards alignmentsthank you , teachers ! teamsexplore science activationscience activation teamsresourcessme mapnationwide eclipse ballooning project ( nebp ) ocean community engagement and awareness using nasa earth observations and science for hispanic/latino studentsopportunitiesnewshighlightshotlinespace placeget involvednasa science at homeart and scienceupcoming eventsconnectemail sign upfollow usresourcestoolkitsdiy - paper spacecraft modelsmission posters : solar systemnew horizons flybyvisual presentations earth day 2022citizen scienceprojectshighlightspublicationsnasa citizen scientistsabout usoverviewscience mission directorateleadershippeopleresourcesscience strategyscience strategydecadal surveysyear in review20152014201320122011201020082007200620052004workforce initiativesbest practices for establishing part-time/time-limited supervisory opportunitiesnew hires orientation workshoprotational program for scientistsscience career opportunities planning and exploration workshopscience career opportunities planning and exploration workshopcareersideaconnectcommunicationscontact usespañolscience in spanish . 
bizarre black holes : interview with physicist kip thorne | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingmeteorite from european fireball ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
science & astronomy . 
bizarre black holes explained : q & a with physicist kip thorne . 
by clara moskowitz published 13 august 2012 . 
simulated view of a black hole in front of the large magellanic cloud . 
( image credit : alain r. | wikimedia commons ) . 
black holes are so strange , so counterintuitive , its hard to believe they actually exist . 
yet scientists say the evidence that black holes are real is almost rock-solid.among the pioneering physicists whove shed light on these dark objects is kip thorne , an emeritus professor at caltech and architect of some of the leading cosmological theories of how black holes warp space and time . 
thorne describes some of the latest thinking on black holes in a paper published in the aug. 3 issue of the journal science.we caught up with thorne about warped space , the nature of singularities inside black holes , and the search for a grand unified theory of physics.space.com : in your paper , you say black holes are objects made wholly and solely of space-time . 
how can that be ? 
arent they also made of mass ? kip thorne : yes , but mass is equivalent to energy , according to einstein , and mass or energy can take many different forms . 
it can take the form of energy in a blowing wind , it can take the form , in this case , of mass or energy that is tied up in the curvature of space-time itself . 
[ photos : black holes of the universe ] space.com : when an object like a star becomes a black hole , what happens to its mass ? thorne : the matter of which a star is made , the atoms of which a star is made , are destroyed at the center of a black hole , when the black hole is created . 
the matter is gone , but the mass , in the sense of mass and energy being equivalent , has gone into the warped space-time of the black hole.space.com : you also talk about collisions between two black holes . 
is this something that we think happens often ? thorne : it happens , we think , in our own galaxy about once every 100,000 years . 
were not sure of that number — it could be every 10,000 years or once every 10 million years . 
looking out through the entire observable universe , its going to happen more like once a minute or once a second.space.com : what happens to space-time when two black holes collide ? thorne : each black hole spins on its axis like the earth spins . 
that spin creates two vortexes of twisting space , somewhat like vortexes in a bathtub or a whirlpool . 
theres one vortex of twisting space that sticks out of the north pole of the black hole , and one vortex that sticks out of the south pole . 
thats one aspect of a black holes warped space-time . 
there are others , but lets just talk about that one.when two black holes orbit around each other and collide and merge , those vortexes then start sweeping around and around the merged black holes . 
they get deposited onto the surface , what we call the horizon , of the merged black holes , so you now have four of these vortexes on the horizon . 
and as the black hole turns , these vortexes sweep back like the spiral arms of a galaxy , or like water from a whirling sprinkler ; they reach outward and backwards and they become these gravitational waves.space.com : is there any chance that black holes dont exist ? thorne : we have very extensive observational evidence by now of black holes . 
the central dark object at the middle of our galaxy has been studied in beautiful observations [ showing ] bright stars that travel around the central object in orbits rather like the orbit of a comet . 
they swing in close to the object and then are thrown back out.the object can be weighed and it seems to weigh between 3 and 4 million times what the sun weighs . 
its not producing any light , but it does produce , in erratic ways over time , bursts of radio waves . 
this object is just like what we think a black hole should be.this still from a computer animation shows a simulation of a giant space cloud falling into sagittarius a * , the supermassive black hole at the center of our own milky way galaxy , in mid-2013 . 
image added on july 2 , 2012 . 
( image credit : european research media center ) so i think in the minds of astronomers now , theres no doubt . 
there certainly was doubt 10 , 20 , 30 years ago . 
but the observational data from electromagnetic observations have become so good , so impressive , that i dont think theres any doubt anymore.space.com : when people talk about black holes , they talk about singularities at their centers . 
is a singularity really a spot of infinite density and zero volume ? thorne : thats one way to describe it , but the singularity , like the black hole itself , we believe is quite rich in its structure . 
[ 8 shocking things we learned from stephen hawkings book ] as you near the singularity , we expect that it stretches and squeezes you in a chaotic way that ultimately kills you and destroys the matter of which youre made . 
and when you get right to the singularity itself , the laws of physics as we know them break down and the laws of quantum gravity take hold . 
since we dont understand those laws very well yet , we cant say what the nature of the very core of the singularity is.space.com : to truly understand whats going on inside black holes , are we going to need a grand unified theory ? thorne : were going to need a definitive quantum theory of gravity , which is part of a grand unified theory — its the main missing piece.we have to have a combination of general relativity that describes the warping of space and time , and quantum physics , which describes the uncertainties in that warping and how they change.follow clara moskowitz on twitter @ claramoskowitz or space.com @ spacedotcom . 
were also on facebook & google+ . . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
clara moskowitzsocial links navigationassistant managing editorclara moskowitz is a science and space writer who joined the space.com team in 2008 and served as assistant managing editor from 2011 to 2013 . 
clara has a bachelors degree in astronomy and physics from wesleyan university , and a graduate certificate in science writing from the university of california , santa cruz . 
she covers everything from astronomy to human spaceflight and once aced a nastar suborbital spaceflight training program for space missions . 
clara is currently associate editor of scientific american . 
to see her latest project is , follow clara on twitter . 
more from space.1japans new h3 rocket aborts 1st-ever launch attempt2virgin galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202133 mystery objects shot down by us likely werent spy craft , biden says4black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy5pictures from space ! 
our image of the day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
skip to main content . 
search for news , events , etc . 
all these words . 
this exact phrase . 
any of these words . 
do not include words like a , and , for , the , etc . 
advanced query syntax . 
all searchable content . 
this site is protected by recaptcha and the google . 
privacy policy and terms of service apply . 
sciencekey conceptssolar systemexoplanetsstars and nebulasgalaxiesuniversecosmic wondersnewsnews releasesmission and telescopethe telescopehubble statsmission timelineinstrumentsservicing missionscollaborating missionshubble ’ s ullyses programquick factstelescope quick factsscience quick factsmission quick factsall quick factsresource galleryimagesvideosarticlesebookslearning resourcestonights skypublic lecture serieslithographshubble heritagerecursos en españolsistema solarexoplanetasestrellas y nebulosasgalaxiasuniversomaravillas cósmicasel telescopioanuncioslitografíaswall muralsactivitieshubble 30th anniversaryimageseventsresourceshubble ’ s exciting universefinding supermassive black holesmeasuring the universes expansion ratediscovering dark energyunveiling galaxy evolutionbeholding the birth and death of starscharacterizing planets around other starssurveying the solar systemfour successful women behind the hubble space telescopes achievementsabout usglossarycontact us . 
( + ) . 
view all articles . 
almost every galaxy has one . 
what are black holes ? . 
a black hole is a region of space packed with so much matter that its own gravity prevents anything from escaping — even a ray of light . 
although we can ’ t see a black hole , the material around it is visible . 
material falling into a black hole forms a disk , similar to a whirlpool in a bathtub drain . 
matter swirling around a black hole heats up and emits radiation that can be detected . 
around a stellar black hole , this matter is composed of gas . 
around a supermassive black hole in the center of a galaxy , the swirling disk is made not only of gas but also of stars . 
stellar black holes . 
stellar black holes form when the center of a very massive , dying star collapses in upon itself . 
this collapse may also cause a supernova , or an exploding star , that blasts the outer parts of the star into space . 
if the core remaining after the supernova is very massive , gravity completely collapses the core into a black hole with infinite density . 
black holes created by supernovas can be about five to 50 times the mass of the sun . 
only stars with very large masses can become black holes . 
our sun , for example , is not massive enough to become a black hole . 
five billion years from now when the sun runs out of the available nuclear fuel in its core , it will end its life as a white dwarf . . 
hubble ’ s ultraviolet instruments detect the particle winds coming off accretion disks from stellar-mass black holes . 
as light from the disk moves through the winds , some of it is absorbed by material in the wind . 
disk winds turn on when a black hole is gobbling material nearly as fast as it can . 
these eating binges usually happen in a matter of months , unlike with supermassive black holes , whose meals take much longer than the course of a human lifetime . 
hubble ’ s unique ultraviolet capabilities make it an ideal tool for understanding matter falling into a black hole . 
supermassive black holes . 
this illustration shows igr j17091-3624 , a binary system that likely contains a stellar-mass black hole . 
the strong gravity of the black hole ( on the left ) is pulling gas away from a companion star ( right ) . 
this forms a disk of hot gas around the black hole ; the particle wind is driven off this disk . 
credit : nasa/cxc/m.weiss . 
stellar black holes are miniscule in comparison to the beasts that astronomers think lie at the centers of most galaxies . 
these black holes are supermassive — millions to billions of times the mass of our sun . 
prior to hubble , astronomers did not have conclusive evidence that supermassive black holes existed in the universe . 
thanks to hubble and other observatories , we now know that supermassive black holes are intricately tied to the evolution of the galaxies in which they reside . 
these black holes formed at the same time as their host galaxies . 
they are thought to have grown from seeds from the earliest massive stars . 
spectacular jets are powered by the gravitational energy of a supermassive black hole in the core of the elliptical galaxy hercules a . 
the jets shoot through space for millions of trillions of miles . 
credit : nasa , esa , s. baum and c. odea ( rit ) , r. perley and w. cotton ( nrao/aui/nsf ) , and the hubble heritage team ( stsci/aura ) news release : 2012-47 > . 
when astronomers first turned radio telescopes on the sky , they tracked radio wave sources to some typical cosmic objects , including the remains of supernovas , distant galaxies and powerful areas of star birth . 
one particular type of object looked like nothing more than a point of light , perhaps a star . 
further observations showed that these objects were extremely far away , meaning they could only be in very distant galaxies . 
the objects , called quasars , were thought to be the incredibly bright centers of those faraway galaxies . . 
we now know quasars are the small but intensely luminous , bidirectional beacons of light produced and powered by supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies . 
galactic material such as gas , dust and even stars , if located too close to a black hole , will succumb to its relentless tug of gravity and be pulled inside . 
as this happens , the infalling material stretches , heats and accelerates , creating enormous forces near the event horizon , the point of no return from the black hole ’ s pull . 
these forces produce powerful , twisting magnetic fields that launch jets of material at near the speed of light and stretch thousands or even millions of light-years across . 
the intense forces create strong radiation across the spectrum , from gamma rays to radio waves . 
the distance to quasars is so great and their actual size so small — about the size of our solar system — that the mere fact that we can see them via telescope makes quasars the brightest objects we ’ ve discovered in the universe . 
in fact , one of hubble ’ s contributions to the quasar mystery was to prove with its high resolution there actually was a galaxy hidden behind the glare . 
hubble observations also helped determine that these brilliant galactic centers are powered by supermassive black holes . 
hubble found quasars in the centers of galaxies that are colliding or brushing up against one another , as well as in elliptical galaxies , which are thought to have developed as a result of multiple galactic mergers . 
these interactions may help feed the supermassive black hole and light up the quasar . 
how does hubble find black holes ? . 
many of hubble ’ s first observations showed the effects of supermassive black holes on their immediate galactic environment . 
in 1990 , shortly after launch , hubble imaged a 30,000-light-year-long jet emanating from a galaxy known to be a prodigious emitter of radio light . 
with hubble ’ s observations , astronomers had the data they needed to determine that these jets come from very small regions in the centers of galaxies and are likely powered by supermassive black holes . 
hubble ’ s fine resolution — the ability to see tiny details — helped propel the case for supermassive black holes even further in 1994 , when astronomers took spectra of the gas in the center of the elliptical galaxy m87 . 
spectra , or the breaking up of light into component colors , can give astronomers a great deal of information about the gas , including its velocity . 
astronomers noted that in m87 the central gas was circling in a disk at very high speeds around a small but massive object . 
the only type of object that can be that massive and yet very small in size is a black hole . 
these observations by hubble helped confirm nearly two centuries of theories and conjectures about the existence of black holes . 
the space telescope imaging spectrograph ( stis ) , an instrument installed on hubble in february 1997 , is the space telescope ’ s main “ black hole hunter. ” a spectrograph uses prisms or diffraction gratings to split the incoming light into its rainbow pattern . 
each element interacts with light in a unique rainbow signature . 
the position and strength of those signatures in a spectrum gives scientists valuable information , such as how fast the stars and gas are moving . 
stis can take a spectrum of many places at once across the center of a galaxy . 
with that information , the central mass that the stars are orbiting can be calculated . 
the faster the stars go , the more massive the central object must be . 
a supermassive black hole creates a jet of particles traveling at nearly the speed of light from the center of galaxy m87 . 
a bright knot in the jet ( hst-1 ) bursts forth from the disk of material swirling around the black hole . 
credit : nasa and the hubble heritage team ( stsci/aura ) news release : 2000-20 > . 
how does a supermassive black hole affect its host galaxy ? . 
from the wealth of hubble data , astronomers now understand that black holes can have profound influences on the galaxy as a whole . 
for example , the jets from supermassive black holes can propel massive amounts of gas and dust into intergalactic space , thus ridding the galaxy of much-needed fuel for ongoing star formation . 
or in the case of a 2015 result using hubble observations of large elliptical galaxies , jets from supermassive black holes may regulate star formation in such a way that it keeps going , albeit at a slower rate . 
perhaps the most surprising result from hubble ’ s observations is that supermassive black holes must reside in the majority , or even in all , galaxies . 
once the objects of extreme speculation , supermassive black holes are now considered integral components of galaxies and crucial to the study of how galaxies evolve over time . 
about this article . 
last updated : . 
september 30 , 2022. . 
video : birth of a black holes . 
video : zoom in to black hole jet . 
how do we know there are black holes ? 
( webbtelescope.org ) . 
the electromagnetic spectrum . 
the meaning of light and color . 
back to top . 
the nasa hubble space telescope is a project of international cooperation between nasa and esa . 
aura ’ s space telescope science institute in baltimore , maryland , conducts hubble science operations . 
the singular pull of black holes in games | space . 
skip to main content . 
all about space magazine . 
.why subscribe ? your monthly guide to stargazing & space sciencesubscribe today and save an extra 5 % with code love5issues delivered straight to your door or devicefrom $ 3.99 .view deal . 
our solar system . 
search for life . 
subscribe to all about space magazine ! . 
trendingrare green comet c/2022 e3 ( zft ) ! best telescopesbest star projectorsnext full moonspace calendarbest binocularslego star wars dealsartemis 1 updatesbest dronessolar system planetsnight sky tonightrussia-ukraine war space impacts . 
when you purchase through links on our site , we may earn an affiliate commission . 
here ’ s how it works . 
the singular pull of black holes in games . 
by andreas inderwildi published 14 february 2022 . 
as mysterious as they are dangerous , black holes in games allow us to reach the unreachable and teach us something along the way . 
( image credit : dreamfeel ) . 
black holes are fascinating . 
no human being has ever been near one , and it wasn ’ t until 2019 that scientists even managed to take a snapshot of one . 
and yet , ever since they have first been hypothesized to exist , black holes have exerted an inexorable pull on our collective imagination . 
black holes are a reminder of the strangeness of our universe , spots of infinite density and at the same time impenetrable emptiness . 
since even light must bend to the gravity of a black hole , we can not know what happens inside of it . 
they are the points where the laws of nature as well as our limited human imagination break down.video games love a good puzzle , and so it ’ s no big surprise that black holes have a habit of popping up here and there . 
what may be surprising , however , is just how many forms and shapes they take . 
as symbols of the unknowable and the extreme , black holes are highly malleable and appear in all sorts of games , playing many parts.before we cross the event horizon of this article , be sure to check out our other gaming content . 
if youre wanting to see the cosmos , our guide to the best space exploration games has you covered . 
weve also got our best vr space games guide for people seeking a truly immersive experience.warning : this article contains spoilers for the following games : elite dangerous , no man ’ s sky , outer wilds , exo one , genesis noir , if found. , night in the woods , dark souls iii , the banner saga 2 , and fortnite.realistic portrayals of black holes ( image credit : vladimir romanyuk ) the first and most obvious place to look are space simulators . 
space engine , universe sandbox , and black hole simulator , considered some of the best vr space experiences , are intricate and educational toys that give us a chance to gawk at black holes up close , to fiddle and prod and poke . 
what happens if we swap our sun with a giant black hole ? 
or if we let two black holes collide ? 
but no matter how detailed the simulation or how many objects we send into oblivion , we will always firmly remain on the outside , looking in.black holes and time-space travel / black holes and space travel / exploring black holes ( image credit : frontier developments plc . 
) science-fiction games give themselves some more leeway when it comes to speculating about black holes . 
in elite dangerous , we undertake the long journey to one of the game ’ s black holes , with the most popular destination being sagittarius a * , the supermassive black hole at the center of our galaxy . 
no man ’ s sky and outer wilds actually let you enter black holes , but they function merely as glorified shortcuts to other parts of the universe . 
it makes you wonder where do black holes lead to ? 
( image credit : mobius digital ) while this approach arguably deprives black holes of some of their mystery , outer wilds does draw on the hypothesized counterparts of black holes : white holes that push instead of pull and expel everything that has fallen into a corresponding black hole . 
in the game ’ s fiction , the ancient people called the nomai have figured out a way to travel through time and space using warp cores consisting of a black/white hole pair.during the game , we get to visit the place where the nomai created these cores : black hole forge on the planet brittle hollow . 
one of the most memorable locations in outer wilds , brittle hollow is being devoured from the inside by the black hole at its center . 
it ’ s an awe-inspiring sight , and if you happen to fall inside the hole , the white hole will spit you out in another corner of the solar system , alongside the discarded fragments of brittle hollow . 
the nomai ’ s advanced technology is connected to the time loop that lies at the heart of the game ; it ’ s technology powered by black holes that sends you back 22 minutes into the past every time the sun goes supernova . 
( image credit : exbleative ) in exo one , we embark on a cosmic journey in a gravity-manipulating spacecraft . 
the destination , it turns out , is a black hole that allows us to travel back in time , preventing a catastrophe on jupiter that killed the main character ’ s colleagues at the start of the game . 
exo one ’ s cosmos is a fantastical , even mystical place . 
its black hole isn ’ t simply a space-time anomaly , but is intimately tied to the fate of our pilot.its somewhat reminiscent of the black hole time travel premise in interstellar , where crossing the event horizon of a black hole allows someone to interact with the past and change events . 
with our current understanding of physics , its almost certainly impossible , but its a fascinating concept nonetheless.black holes and mental health ( image credit : feral cat den ) a black hole as a journey ’ s enigmatic endpoint , promising a chance to see and act beyond time ; genesis noir , though a very different game from exo one , follows a similar trajectory . 
the game presents an allegorical and fantastical interpretation of the events leading up to the big bang and the creation of our universe . 
presented in a jazzy film noir style , the story follows the attempts of no man ( a metaphorical representation of time ) to save his love miss mass ( a metaphorical representation of , you guessed it , mass ) from a bullet shot by golden boy ( energy ) . 
to do so , no man seeks to create a black hole that would swallow the bullet . 
but , since the shooting of miss mass is also what causes the big bang , saving her would also prevent the universe from coming into existence . 
in the end , no man has an epiphany that convinces him to drop his quest and make place for the universe.genesis noir is full of metaphors , and its black hole can be read as a stand-in for self-destructive urges and a negation of being itself . 
even in this allegorical and abstract cosmogony , the significance of the black hole is decidedly personal and tied up in psychological struggles . 
( image credit : dreamfeel ) genesis noir is just one example of black holes acting as metaphors for personal crises . 
presents its narrative of kasio , a young irish trans woman ’ s struggles to be accepted and find her place , through an entwined dual narrative : one is an exploration of a diary , and the other a metaphorical science-fiction story . 
the sci-fi story revolves around a lonely astronaut called cassiopeia and her discovery of a black hole which threatens to swallow earth.it soon becomes clear that the black hole expresses kasio ’ s existential fears , feelings of isolation , and sense of futility . 
the breakdown of space-time inside a black hole is reframed as a personal , psychological breakdown : “ time doesn ’ t exist in a black hole . 
every moment crushed together , past and present and future in one endless scream . 
no way to change anything. ” ( image credit : infinite fall ) now , night in the woods doesn ’ t explicitly name black holes , but its preoccupation with the night sky and metaphorical holes is very similar to if found . 
here , too , our protagonist mae is threatened by black emptiness expressing mental health crises , namely her feelings of emptiness , dissociation , and fragmentation . 
the game speaks of “ the hole in the center of everything ” and her diary depicts mae being swallowed by a black hole-like maelstrom.black holes - symbols of cosmic crises / black holes in myths and folklore ( image credit : fromsoftware inc. ) if black holes can be used as shorthand for personal crises , it stands to reason that they can also be symbols of cosmic crises . 
in dark souls iii , the sun turns dark after a certain point in the game . 
the ominous spectacle is never explained , but recalls either an eclipse , the darksign ( symbol of the dying light and the curse of the undead ) , or a black hole . 
the banner saga trilogy has a similar motif . 
in the third game , we learn about the existence of a subterranean dark sun , and that it was its destruction which released a giant serpent as well as an all-consuming darkness that spreads across the world . 
( image credit : stoic studio ) even though these games do not , strictly speaking , show black holes , there ’ s more than a little family resemblance between them , and they can easily be interpreted as black holes through the lens of myth and folklore , with the likes of apocalyptic dragons or wolves swallowing the sun . 
interestingly , the symbol of the dark or black sun is a very old idea that predates our knowledge of black holes for many centuries . 
it ’ s part of the tradition of alchemical and hermetic thought , signifying the dark , material fire as opposed to the pure and bright fire of the spiritual world.the light side of black holes ( image credit : daniel stolcius de stolzenberg ) all of this sounds like a very serious matter . 
but black holes can also be light-hearted , playful , and even silly . 
just look at the end event of fortnite ’ s first chapter , when the entire game world disappeared into a black hole and made the game unplayable for a few days , or the black hole item in ultimate chicken horse , which pulls on nearby objects and changes the trajectory of arrows.for every grounded simulation , there ’ s a mystical and reason-defying black hole . 
for every black hole that throws light on a character ’ s deepest struggles , there ’ s a playful or toy-like singularity . 
it is precisely because of their inherent emptiness and silence , their defiance of meaning and understanding , and their definition through negation and apparent paradox , that both exerts a powerful pull on our imagination and that enables black holes to play a vast range of very different parts . 
as a cipher , the black hole can stand for the inescapable , for profound lack or distortion , for the grand and unknown mysteries of the universe , for fantastical possibilities and godlike power over space-time itself , and more . 
and since video games remain the only way of getting close to a black hole , they will continue being anything but a singularity in future games.play outer wilds , elite dangerous , exo one , no mans sky , & genesis noir on xbox game pass .pc . $ 4.99/mth .view deal .at microsoft us . 
.ultimate . $ 14.99/mth .view deal .at microsoft us . 
join our space forums to keep talking space on the latest missions , night sky and more ! 
and if you have a news tip , correction or comment , let us know at : community @ space.com . 
andreas inderwildisocial links navigationwriter , critic , social media manager , communications specialistwriter , critic , novelist , and social media content creator with an academic background in english literature and ( medieval ) history . 
as a freelance contributor , i have written for sites and magazines with a wide reach in the us , the uk , germany and switzerland . 
writing and putting novel ideas on paper is what keeps me going , from tweets and blog posts , to interviews and essays , to papers and novels . 
my interests include literature and film , history and politics , video games and social media . 
more from space.1james webb space telescope opens pandoras cluster in stunning image with help from einstein ( video ) 2supercharged valentines day auroras give alaska-based polar lights chaser the night of his life ( photos ) 3comet c/2022 a2 ( pan-starrs ) passes close by the sun this weekend4pakistan gets space-flown seeds from chinas shenzhou 14 mission ( video ) 5pictures from space ! 
our image of the day . 
space is part of future us inc , an international media group and leading digital publisher . 
visit our corporate site . 
terms and conditions . 
advertise with us . 
future us , inc. full 7th floor , 130 west 42nd street , . 
new york , . 
hubblesite : black holes : gravitys relentless pull interactive : encyclopedia . 
black holes : gravitys relentless pull . 
javascript must be installed and turned on in your browser to view content on most pages of this site , including journey to a black hole . 
.if you experience other problems , verify that your setup matches the technical requirements for this site . 
how many black holes are there ? . 
there are so many black holes in the universe that it is impossible to count them . 
its like asking how many grains of sand are on the beach . 
fortunately , the . 
.universe is enormous and none of its known black holes are close enough to pose any danger to earth . 
stellar-mass black holes form from the most massive stars when their lives end in supernova explosions . 
the milky way galaxy contains some 100 billion . 
roughly one out of every thousand stars that form is massive enough to become a black hole . 
therefore , our galaxy must harbor some 100 million stellar-mass . 
most of these are invisible to us , and only about a dozen have been identified . 
the nearest one is some 1,600 lightyears from earth . 
in the region . 
.of the universe visible from earth , there are perhaps 100 billion galaxies . 
each one has about 100 million stellar-mass black holes . 
and somewhere out there , a . 
.new stellar-mass black hole is born in a supernova every second . 
supermassive black holes are a million to a billion times more massive than our sun and are found in the centers of galaxies . 
most galaxies , and maybe all . 
.of them , harbor such a black hole . 
so in our region of the universe , there are some 100 billion supermassive black holes . 
the nearest one resides in the center . 
.of our milky way galaxy , 28 thousand lightyears away . 
the most distant we know of lives in a quasar galaxy billions of lightyears away . 
