





Magnetic Fields May Muzzle Milky Way's Monster Black Hole | Space


















































































































Skip to main content






Open menu
Close menu






Space

















Space 




Search

 


Search Space



 



Subscribe



RSS




  (opens in new tab)

  (opens in new tab)

  (opens in new tab)

  (opens in new tab)

  (opens in new tab)





All About Space Magazine (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab)Why subscribe?Your monthly guide to stargazing & space scienceSubscribe today and save an extra 5% with code 'LOVE5'Issues delivered straight to your door or deviceFrom$3.99 (opens in new tab)View (opens in new tab)












News




Astronomy




Spaceflight




The Moon




Our Solar System




Skywatching




More




Videos


Search for LIfe


Technology


Entertainment


Reference


SpaceX


Expert Voices


Forums


All Topics


Subscribe to "All About Space" Magazine!


Space.com Store


About Us


Web Notifications





 





TrendingRare green Comet C/2022 E3 (ZFT)!Best TelescopesBest Star ProjectorsNext Full MoonSpace CalendarBest BinocularsLego Star Wars dealsArtemis 1 updatesBest DronesSolar System PlanetsNight Sky TonightRussia-Ukraine war space impacts

When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.






Home


News


Science & Astronomy



Magnetic Fields May Muzzle Milky Way's Monster Black Hole


By Nola Taylor Tillman published 14 June 2019 

Magnetic fields may keep the Milky Way's supermassive black hole quiet.




  (opens in new tab)



  (opens in new tab)



 




 (opens in new tab)



  (opens in new tab)



  (opens in new tab)























In this image, streamlines showing magnetic fields overlay a color image of the dusty ring surrounding the Milky Way's supermassive black hole. Warm material falling toward the black hole creates a Y-shaped structure, with the black hole lying near the intersection of the two arms. 
(Image credit: Dust and magnetic fields: NASA/SOFIA; Star field image: NASA/Hubble Space Telescope)




Magnetic forces may explain why the supermassive black hole at the heart of the Milky Way is so much quieter than its counterparts in other galaxies. New observations, taken by NASA's Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) mission, reveal unprecedented information about the strong magnetic field lines at the center of the galaxy.The strong gravitational pull of the Milky Way's central black hole, which is known as Sagittarius A*, dominates the heart of the galaxy. In general, as material falls into black holes, the dark giants emit high-energy radiation that reveals their presence. Compared to black holes seen in other galaxies, however, the Milky Way's heart is relatively quiet, emitting far less radiation than expected. Understanding how black holes interact with their magnetic fields can help scientists understand the difference between active and quiet black holes.Related: Images: Black Holes of the UniverseWhether they exist around refrigerator magnets or black holes, magnetic fields are invisible. To study the ones connected to Sagittarius A*, researchers relied on SOFIA, which is a modified Boeing 747SP aircraft. Specifically, they employed SOFIA's newest instrument, the High-resolution Airborne Wideband Camera-Plus (HAWC+), to track polarized far-infrared light emitted by dust particles. Because dust grains line up perpendicular to magnetic fields, astronomers were able to map the shape and infer the strength of the magnetic field around the black hole. Combining the new map with mid- and far-infrared images of Sagittarius A* revealed the direction of the magnetic field. While some of the material from the surrounding ring of gas and dust is falling toward the black hole, the magnetic field also directs material away from the hungry giant, researchers said."The spiral shape of the magnetic field channels the gas into an orbit around the black hole,"  HAWC+ principal investigator Darren Dowell, of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said in a statement. "This could explain why our black hole is quiet while others are active," added Dowell, lead author of a new study reporting the SOFIA results.Sagittarius A* is the closest supermassive black hole to the sun and therefore provides a good opportunity to learn how the mysterious giants function."This is one of the first instances where we can really see how magnetic fields and interstellar matter interact with each other," said study co-author Joan Schmelz, an astrophysicist at NASA Ames Research Center in California. "HAWC+ is a game-changer."The results were presented at the 234th semiannual meeting of the American Astronomical Society, which was held this week in St. Louis.Photos from SOFIA, NASA's Flying Telescope (Gallery)Black Hole Quiz: How Well Do You Know Nature's Weirdest Creations?Our Milky Way Galaxy: A Traveler's Guide (Infographic)Follow Nola on Facebook and on Twitter at @NolaTRedd. Follow us on Twitter @Spacedotcom and on Facebook. 


Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more! And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com.

Nola Taylor TillmanSocial Links NavigationContributing WriterNola Taylor Tillman is a contributing writer for Space.com. She loves all things space and astronomy-related, and enjoys the opportunity to learn more. She has a Bachelor’s degree in English and Astrophysics from Agnes Scott college and served as an intern at Sky & Telescope magazine. In her free time, she homeschools her four children. Follow her on Twitter at @NolaTRedd


























MORE FROM SPACE...1Watch debut launch of Japan's powerful new H3 rocket on Tuesday2'No indication' shot-down objects are alien spacecraft, White House says3Russia releases 1st images of damage to leaky Soyuz spacecraft (photos)4'Sphere' is 25 and coming to TV soon. Here's why Michael Crichton's mind-bending sci-fi tale is still awesome5What are these mystery objects that US fighter jets keep shooting down?










Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site (opens in new tab).


About Us (opens in new tab)
Terms and conditions (opens in new tab)
Privacy policy (opens in new tab)
Cookies policy (opens in new tab)
Accessibility Statement (opens in new tab)
Topics (opens in new tab)
Advertise with us (opens in new tab)
Web notifications (opens in new tab)
Careers (opens in new tab)


©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. 


 











 



 
