




Will our black hole eat the Milky Way?






















































Topics





Week's top


Latest news


Unread news


Subscribe


























Science X Account




























Remember me




Sign In



                           Click here to sign in with
                               


                                   or
                                





Forget Password?


Not a member?
                           Sign up



Learn more



























Nanotechnology


Physics


Earth


Astronomy & Space


Chemistry


Biology


Other Sciences



 Medicine
                                



 Technology
                                 
































share this!






Share







Twit







Share







Email












Home




Astronomy & Space




Astronomy











































                                                August 16, 2016
                                                				
                                            


Will our black hole eat the Milky Way?

										 by Fraser Cain, 										 										 Universe Today 






                Sagittarius A*. Credit: Chandra
             


Want to hear something cool? There's a black hole at the center of the Milky Way. And not just any black hole, it's a supermassive black hole with more than 4.1 million times the mass of the Sun.

										  
											        






It's right over there, in the direction of the Sagittarius constellation. Located just 26,000 light-years away. And as we speak, it's in the process of tearing apart entire stars and star systems, occasionally consuming them, adding to its mass like a voracious shark.
Wait, that doesn't sound cool, that sort of sounds a little scary. Right?
Don't worry, you have absolutely nothing to worry about, unless you plan to live for quadrillions of years, which I do, thanks to my future robot body. I'm ready for my singularity, Dr. Kurzweil.
Is the supermassive black hole going to consume the Milky Way? If not, why not? If so, why so?
The discovery of a supermassive black hole at the heart of the Milky Way, and really almost all galaxies, is one of my favorite discoveries in the field of astronomy. It's one of those insights that simultaneously answered some questions, and opened up even more.
Back in the 1970s, the astronomers Bruce Balick and Robert Brown realized that there was an intense source of radio emissions coming from the very center of the Milky Way, in the constellation Sagittarius.










Credit: Universe Today

They designated it Sgr A*. The asterisk stands for exciting. You think I'm joking, but I'm not. For once, I'm not joking.
In 2002, astronomers observed that there were stars zipping past this object, like comets on elliptical paths going around the Sun. Imagine the mass of our Sun, and the tremendous power it would take to wrench a star like that around.
The only objects with that much density and gravity are black holes, but in this case, a black hole with millions of times the mass of our own Sun: a supermassive black hole.
With the discovery of the Milky Way's supermassive black hole, astronomers found evidence that there are black holes at the heart of every galaxy.
At the same time, the discovery of supermassive black holes helped answer one of the big questions in astronomy: what are quasars? We did a whole article on them, but they're intensely bright objects, generating enough light they can be seen billions of light-years away. Giving off more energy than the rest of their own galaxy combined.


											  													    





It turns out that quasars and supermassive black holes are the same thing. Quasars are just black holes in the process of actively feeding; gobbling up so much material it piles up in an accretion disk around it. Once again, these do sound terrifying. But are we in any danger?
In the short term, no. The black hole at the center of the Milky Way is 26,000 light-years away. Even if it turned into a quasar and started eating stars, you wouldn't even be able to notice it from this distance.





                An illustration of Saggitarius A*. Credit: NASA/CXC/M.Weiss
             


A black hole is just a concentration of mass in a very small region, which things orbit around. To give you an example, you could replace the Sun with a black hole with the exact same mass, and nothing would change. I mean, we'd all freeze because there wasn't a Sun in the sky anymore, but the Earth would continue to orbit this black hole in exactly the same orbit, for billions of years.
Same goes with the black hole at the center of the Milky Way. It's not pulling material in like a vacuum cleaner, it serves as a gravitational anchor for a group of stars to orbit around, for billions of years.
In order for a black hole to actually consume a star, it needs to make a direct hit. To get within the event horizon, which is only about 17 times bigger than the Sun. If a star gets close, without hitting, it'll get torn apart, but still, it doesn't happen very often.
The problem happens when these stars interact with one another through their own gravity, and mess with each other's orbits. A star that would have been orbiting happily for billions of years might get deflected into a collision course with the black hole. But this happens very rarely.
Over the short term, that supermassive black hole is totally harmless. Especially from out here in the galactic suburbs.
But there are a few situations that might cause some problems over vast periods of time.
The first panic will happen when the Milky Way collides with Andromeda in about 4 billion years – let's call this mess Milkdromeda. Suddenly, you'll have two whole clouds of stars interacting in all kinds of ways, like an unstable blended family. Stars that would have been safe will careen past other stars and be deflected down into the maw of either of the two supermassive black holes on hand. Andromeda's black hole could be 100 million times the mass of the Sun, so it's a bigger target for stars with a death wish.





                The quasar SDSS J1106+1939 has the most energetic outflows ever seen, at least five times more powerful than any that have been observed to date. Credit: ESO/L. Calçada
             


Over the coming billions, trillions and quadrillions of years, more and more galaxies will collide with Milkdromeda, bringing new supermassive black holes and more stars to the chaos.
So many opportunities for mayhem.
Of course, the Sun will die in about 5 billion years, so this future won't be our problem. Well, fine, with my eternal robot body, it might still be my problem.
After our neighborhood is completely out of galaxies to consume, then there will just be countless eons of time for stars to interact for orbit after orbit. Some will get flung out of Milkdromeda, some will be hurled down into the black hole.
And others will be safe, assuming they can avoid this fate over the Googol years it'll take for the supermassive black hole to finally evaporate. That's a 1 followed by 100 zeroes years. That's a really really long time, so now I don't like those odds.
For our purposes, the black hole at the heart of the Milky Way is completely and totally safe. In the lifetime of the Sun, it won't interact with us in any way, or consume more than a handful of stars.
But over the vast eons, it could be a different story. I hope we can be around to find out the answer.
										 																				
																					
																					

													Source:
																											Universe Today





Citation:
												Will our black hole eat the Milky Way? (2016, August 16)
												retrieved 14 February 2023
												from https://phys.org/news/2016-08-black-hole-milky.html
											 

											 This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private study or research, no
											 part may be reproduced without the written permission. The content is provided for information purposes only.
											 









Explore further

Image: Computer simulation of a supermassive black hole




45 shares
									






Facebook







Twitter







Email







 Feedback to editors


















Featured


Last Comments


Popular





Event Horizon Telescope captures images of NRAO 530 quasar





14 hours ago





2




Using rocks found in Minnesota to help explain how Mars could have developed an atmosphere





15 hours ago





0




Hundreds of new high-redshift quasars discovered





16 hours ago





0




New Earth-sized exoplanet detected in the solar neighborhood





Feb 12, 2023





5




How fingerprints get their unique whorls





Feb 10, 2023





0

















 
Researchers reveal the oldest spinosaur brains





6 hours ago









 
Study reveals biodiversity engine for fishes: Shifting water depth





8 hours ago









 
New model of quark-gluon plasma solves a long-standing discrepancy between theory and data





8 hours ago









 
Nightly sleep is key to student success, shows study





9 hours ago









 
Coral reefs in the Eastern Pacific could survive into the 2060s, new study finds





9 hours ago









 
Leonardo da Vinci's forgotten experiments explored gravity as a form of acceleration





9 hours ago









 
RNA's 'joints' play key role in our gene expression, scientists find





9 hours ago









 
Taxonomy goes viral: Experts publish a new set of consensus principles to classify the virosphere





9 hours ago









 
Is spontaneous sex better? New research casts doubt on commonly held belief





10 hours ago









 
Researchers solve a 150-year-old mystery about aetosaurs





10 hours ago

































Related Stories





 
Image: Computer simulation of a supermassive black hole





Apr 7, 2016









 
Where is the closest black hole?





Mar 21, 2016









 
Could the Milky Way become a quasar?





Feb 27, 2015











 
How massive can black holes get?





Aug 11, 2015









 
Hubble image: The sleeping giant





Feb 11, 2016









 
Rare galaxy with 2 black holes has 1 starved of stars





Jan 5, 2016










Recommended for you





 
Event Horizon Telescope captures images of NRAO 530 quasar





14 hours ago









 
Hundreds of new high-redshift quasars discovered





16 hours ago









 
Small planets orbiting low-mass stars detected with the SPIRou instrument and the TESS satellite





11 hours ago











 
Hubble captures the start of a new spoke season on Saturn





Feb 9, 2023









 
Hobby-Eberly telescope reveals galaxy gold mine in first large survey





Feb 9, 2023









 
If wormholes exist, they might magnify light by 100,000 times





Feb 8, 2023


























										Load comments (1)
									 














Let us know if there is a problem with our content










											Use this form if you have come across a typo, inaccuracy or would like to send an edit request for the content on this page.
											For general inquiries, please use our  contact form.
											For general feedback, use the public comments section below (please adhere to guidelines).
										
Please select the most appropriate category to facilitate processing of your request


 -- please select one -- 
Compliments / Critique
Typos / Errors / Inaccuracies
Edit / Removal request




Your message to the editors





Your  email  (only if you want to be contacted back)




Send Feedback




Thank you for taking time to provide your feedback to the editors.
Your feedback is important to us. However, we do not guarantee individual replies due to the high volume of messages. 









E-mail the story
Will our black hole eat the Milky Way?











Your friend's email





Your email









                                            I would like to subscribe to Science X Newsletter. Learn more







Your name



Note

                                            Your email address is used only to let the recipient know who sent the email. Neither your address nor the recipient's address will be used for any other purpose.
											The information you enter will appear in your e-mail message and is not retained by Phys.org in any form. 
                                        




Your message









Send







































Newsletter sign up

					Get weekly and/or daily updates delivered to your inbox.
					You can unsubscribe at any time and we'll never share your details to third parties.
				






Subscribe



More information
Privacy policy













Medical Xpress
Medical research advances and health news









Tech Xplore
The latest engineering, electronics and technology advances









Science X
The most comprehensive sci-tech news coverage on the web










Newsletters







Subscribe






                                                Science X Daily and the Weekly Email Newsletter are free features that allow you to receive your favorite sci-tech news updates in your email inbox
                                            






Follow us































Top


Home


Search


Mobile version




Help


FAQ


About


Contact




Science X Account


Sponsored Account


Archive


News wire




Android app


iOS app


RSS feeds


Push notification







© Phys.org 2003 - 2023 powered by Science X Network


Privacy policy
Terms of use





Your Privacy

                    This site uses cookies to assist with navigation, analyse your use of our services, collect data for ads personalisation and provide content from third parties.
                    By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understand our Privacy Policy
                    and Terms of Use.
                

Ok
Cookie options













E-mail newsletter








Subscribe


Follow us










































