











Germany switches off black hole telescope on Russian satellite, halts space cooperation | Space





































































































































































































































Skip to main content













Open menu

Close menu













Space



































Space 









Search



 





Search Space







 







Subscribe







RSS









  




  




  




  




  












All About Space Magazine 
 
Why subscribe?Your monthly guide to stargazing & space scienceSubscribe today and save an extra 5% with code LOVE5Issues delivered straight to your door or deviceFrom$3.99 
View 


























News









Astronomy









Spaceflight









The Moon









Our Solar System









Skywatching









More









Videos





Search for LIfe





Technology





Entertainment





Reference





SpaceX





Expert Voices





Forums





All Topics





Subscribe to All About Space Magazine!





Space.com Store





About Us





Web Notifications











 











TrendingRare green Comet C/2022 E3 (ZFT)!Best TelescopesBest Star ProjectorsNext Full MoonSpace CalendarBest BinocularsLego Star Wars dealsArtemis 1 updatesBest DronesSolar System PlanetsNight Sky TonightRussia-Ukraine war space impacts



When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.













Home





News





Science & Astronomy







Germany switches off black hole telescope on Russian satellite, halts space cooperation





By Tereza Pultarova published 3 March 2022 



 Germany stopped all science cooperation with Russia over its Ukraine invasion, but space station work continues.









  








  








 









 








  








  
















































The German eROSITA black hole telescope aboard the Russia-built Spetr-RG satellite was switched off as Germany halted science cooperation with Russia.

(Image credit: German Aerospace Center)









A German-built space telescope making the largest ever map of black holes in the universe has been switched off after Germany halted all science cooperation with Russia to protest that countrys invasion of Ukraine. The black hole-hunting telescope, called eROSITA, launched in 2019 from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan aboard the Russian-built Spectrum-Roentgen-Gamma satellite. The mission was jointly funded by the German Aerospace Center (DLR) and Russias space agency Roscosmos. On Wednesday, a spokesperson for Germanys Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, which built and operates eROSITA, told Space.com in an email that the telescope was placed into safe mode during ground contact on Saturday, February 26.The move comes after Germanys Federal Ministry of Education and Research announced on Friday 
 (Feb. 25) that all existing, long-standing cooperation in science and research with Russia would be immediately halted. Related: Ukraines proud space industry faces obliteration, but its former space chief hopes for the futureDLR issued its own statement 
 on Thursday (March 3), confirming that it would pause all partnerships with Russia. In light of the aggression against Ukraine, the DLR Executive Board decided to stop cooperation on ongoing and planned projects, the DLR said in the statement. No new projects and initiatives with Russian research institutions will take place.Germany previously worked with Russia on the Bion M 
 mission, which sent 45 mice and several lizard, fish and snail species on a month-long space trip in 2013. The two countries have also collaborated on development of robotic technologies 
 for space exploration. Most significant, perhaps, is the fact that Germany is the largest contributor to the budget of the European Space Agency (ESA), which is part of the International Space Station partnership that includes Russia, Japan and the U.S. Currently, German ESA astronaut Matthias Maurer is on board of the orbital outpost together with Russian cosmonauts Pyotr Dubrov and Anton Shkaplerov. NASA astronauts Kayla Barron, Mark Vande Hei, Raja Chari and Thomas Mashburn are also on the space station.The ISS partnership has for years been considered above politics but with the quickly escalating Russian aggression against Ukraine, questions have been raised about its future. Russia previously said it did not plan to cooperate with western countries in future space exploration endeavors beyond the ISS. For now, the ISS cooperation continues unchanged. Frances space agency CNES said in a statement 
 issued on Wednesday (March 2) that the ISS collaboration under ESA continues with the involvement of all the partners of the station.The same applies for several CNES/Roscosmos research partnerships aboard the space station focused on space medicine, CNES said in the same statement.CNES, which operates Europes spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana, is currently looking at possibilities to replace the Russia-supplied Soyuz rocket in several planned European governmental missions with Europes own Vega or Ariane 5. That includes the launch of two navigation satellites of the European constellation Galileo (an equivalent to the U.S. GPS), which was planned for later this year. European launch provider Arianespace had been using Soyuz since 2011 to complement the light Vega and heavy-lift Ariane 5 launchers. CNESs announcement followed on Russias decisions earlier this week to halt Soyuz launches from French Guiana immediately, in light of what Russia perceived as western aggression.Related stories:— Europes Mars rover will likely miss 2022 launch on Russian rocket due to Ukraine invasion sanctions

— Russian space program chief says US sanctions could destroy International Space Station partnership— Soviet-era space shuttle carrier aircraft destroyed in Russian attack on UkraineIn late 2021, Germany arrested a Russian researcher working at a university in Bavaria for leaking information on Europes Ariane launcher program to Russian intelligence, according to Reuters. Germany had previously been criticized for its permissive attitude to Russia following the 2014 military annexation of the former Ukrainian territory of Crimea, Reuters reported. Follow Tereza Pultarova on Twitter @TerezaPultarova. Follow us on Twitter @Spacedotcom and on Facebook. 





Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more! And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com.



Tereza PultarovaSocial Links NavigationSenior WriterTereza is a London-based science and technology journalist, aspiring fiction writer and amateur gymnast. Originally from Prague, the Czech Republic, she spent the first seven years of her career working as a reporter, script-writer and presenter for various TV programmes of the Czech Public Service Television. She later took a career break to pursue further education and added a Masters in Science from the International Space University, France, to her Bachelors in Journalism and Masters in Cultural Anthropology from Pragues Charles University. She worked as a reporter at the Engineering and Technology magazine, freelanced for a range of publications including Live Science, Space.com, Professional Engineering, Via Satellite and Space News and served as a maternity cover science editor at the European Space Agency.





















































MORE FROM SPACE...1South Koreas Danuri probe captures phases of Earth from lunar orbit (photo)2Hubble spies strange spokes on Saturns rings after 14-year hiatus (video)3Europes JUICE Jupiter spacecraft arrives at spaceport ahead of April launch4Sun storm may supercharge auroras for Valentines Day5What is the U.S. Space Force and what does it do?





















Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site 
.





About Us 


Terms and conditions 


Privacy policy 


Cookies policy 


Accessibility Statement 


Topics 


Advertise with us 


Web notifications 


Careers 






©

Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,

New York,

NY 10036. 





 























 







 

