











Magnetic Fields May Muzzle Milky Ways Monster Black Hole | Space





































































































































































































































Skip to main content













Open menu

Close menu













Space



































Space 









Search



 





Search Space







 







Subscribe







RSS









  




  




  




  




  












All About Space Magazine 
 
Why subscribe?Your monthly guide to stargazing & space scienceSubscribe today and save an extra 5% with code LOVE5Issues delivered straight to your door or deviceFrom$3.99 
View 


























News









Astronomy









Spaceflight









The Moon









Our Solar System









Skywatching









More









Videos





Search for LIfe





Technology





Entertainment





Reference





SpaceX





Expert Voices





Forums





All Topics





Subscribe to All About Space Magazine!





Space.com Store





About Us





Web Notifications











 











TrendingMeteorite from European fireball!Best TelescopesBest Star ProjectorsNext Full MoonSpace CalendarBest BinocularsLego Star Wars dealsArtemis 1 updatesBest DronesSolar System PlanetsNight Sky TonightRussia-Ukraine war space impacts



When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.













Home





News





Science & Astronomy







Magnetic Fields May Muzzle Milky Ways Monster Black Hole





By Nola Taylor Tillman published 14 June 2019 



Magnetic fields may keep the Milky Ways supermassive black hole quiet.









  








  








 









 








  








  
















































In this image, streamlines showing magnetic fields overlay a color image of the dusty ring surrounding the Milky Ways supermassive black hole. Warm material falling toward the black hole creates a Y-shaped structure, with the black hole lying near the intersection of the two arms. 

(Image credit: Dust and magnetic fields: NASA/SOFIA; Star field image: NASA/Hubble Space Telescope)









Magnetic forces may explain why the supermassive black hole at the heart of the Milky Way is so much quieter than its counterparts in other galaxies. New observations, taken by NASAs Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) mission, reveal unprecedented information about the strong magnetic field lines at the center of the galaxy.The strong gravitational pull of the Milky Ways central black hole, which is known as Sagittarius A*, dominates the heart of the galaxy. In general, as material falls into black holes, the dark giants emit high-energy radiation that reveals their presence. Compared to black holes seen in other galaxies, however, the Milky Ways heart is relatively quiet, emitting far less radiation than expected. Understanding how black holes interact with their magnetic fields can help scientists understand the difference between active and quiet black holes.Related: Images: Black Holes of the UniverseWhether they exist around refrigerator magnets or black holes, magnetic fields are invisible. To study the ones connected to Sagittarius A*, researchers relied on SOFIA, which is a modified Boeing 747SP aircraft. Specifically, they employed SOFIAs newest instrument, the High-resolution Airborne Wideband Camera-Plus (HAWC+), to track polarized far-infrared light emitted by dust particles. Because dust grains line up perpendicular to magnetic fields, astronomers were able to map the shape and infer the strength of the magnetic field around the black hole. Combining the new map with mid- and far-infrared images of Sagittarius A* revealed the direction of the magnetic field. While some of the material from the surrounding ring of gas and dust is falling toward the black hole, the magnetic field also directs material away from the hungry giant, researchers said.The spiral shape of the magnetic field channels the gas into an orbit around the black hole,  HAWC+ principal investigator Darren Dowell, of NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said in a statement. This could explain why our black hole is quiet while others are active, added Dowell, lead author of a new study reporting the SOFIA results.Sagittarius A* is the closest supermassive black hole to the sun and therefore provides a good opportunity to learn how the mysterious giants function.This is one of the first instances where we can really see how magnetic fields and interstellar matter interact with each other, said study co-author Joan Schmelz, an astrophysicist at NASA Ames Research Center in California. HAWC+ is a game-changer.The results were presented at the 234th semiannual meeting of the American Astronomical Society, which was held this week in St. Louis.Photos from SOFIA, NASAs Flying Telescope (Gallery)Black Hole Quiz: How Well Do You Know Natures Weirdest Creations?Our Milky Way Galaxy: A Travelers Guide (Infographic)Follow Nola on Facebook and on Twitter at @NolaTRedd. Follow us on Twitter @Spacedotcom and on Facebook. 





Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more! And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com.



Nola Taylor TillmanSocial Links NavigationContributing WriterNola Taylor Tillman is a contributing writer for Space.com. She loves all things space and astronomy-related, and enjoys the opportunity to learn more. She has a Bachelor’s degree in English and Astrophysics from Agnes Scott college and served as an intern at Sky & Telescope magazine. In her free time, she homeschools her four children. Follow her on Twitter at @NolaTRedd





















































MORE FROM SPACE...1Japans new H3 rocket aborts 1st-ever launch attempt2Virgin Galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202133 mystery objects shot down by US likely werent spy craft, Biden says4Black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy5Pictures from space! Our image of the day





















Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site 
.





About Us 


Terms and conditions 


Privacy policy 


Cookies policy 


Accessibility Statement 


Topics 


Advertise with us 


Web notifications 


Careers 






©

Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,

New York,

NY 10036. 





 























 







 

