











Something Weird Is Happening to the Black Hole at the Center of the Milky Way | Space

































































































































































































































Skip to main content













Open menu

Close menu













Space



































Space 









Search



 





Search Space







 







Subscribe







RSS









  




  




  




  




  












All About Space Magazine 
 
Why subscribe?Your monthly guide to stargazing & space scienceSubscribe today and save an extra 5% with code LOVE5Issues delivered straight to your door or deviceFrom$3.99 
View 


























News









Astronomy









Spaceflight









The Moon









Our Solar System









Skywatching









More









Videos





Search for LIfe





Technology





Entertainment





Reference





SpaceX





Expert Voices





Forums





All Topics





Subscribe to All About Space Magazine!





Space.com Store





About Us





Web Notifications











 











TrendingMeteorite from European fireball!Best TelescopesBest Star ProjectorsNext Full MoonSpace CalendarBest BinocularsLego Star Wars dealsArtemis 1 updatesBest DronesSolar System PlanetsNight Sky TonightRussia-Ukraine war space impacts



When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.













Home





News





Science & Astronomy







Something Weird Is Happening to the Black Hole at the Center of the Milky Way





By Meghan Bartels last updated 11 May 2022 













  








  








 









 








  








  
















































An artists depiction of a black hole at the center of a galaxy.

(Image credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech)









Astronomers have been watching the black hole at the center of our galaxy for 20 years, and in May, they saw something theyd never seen before.Well, technically, they arent watching the black hole itself, which scientists call Sagittarius A*, or Sgr A*. Instead, theyre looking at the matter around that black hole. When the Milky Ways black hole is more active than usual, that event horizon becomes brighter as it heats up due to friction. Usually, Sgr A* is pretty calm for a black hole, but in May, that changed, according to new research.The black hole is always variable, but this was the brightest weve seen in the infrared so far, Tuan Do, an astronomer at the University of California, Los Angeles, and lead author of the new study, said on Twitter. It was probably even brighter before we started observing that night!Related: Eureka! Scientists Photograph a Black Hole for the 1st TimeThat hypothesis is based on the fact that, when the astronomers focused on the area on May 13, they only saw relatively high brightness decreasing, suggesting that the black hole had passed an unknown peak that was even brighter. According to the new paper, the recent flare brought Sgr A* to twice the brightness of the highest previous measurement to date.Do and his colleagues made the observations using the Keck telescopes on the summit of Mauna Kea in Hawaii. That instrument can see the world in near infrared light, which encompasses wavelengths a bit longer than those our eyes can see.Heres a timelapse of images over 2.5 hr from May from @keckobservatory of the supermassive black hole Sgr A*. The black hole is always variable, but this was the brightest weve seen in the infrared so far. It was probably even brighter before we started observing that night! pic.twitter.com/MwXioZ7twVAugust 11, 2019See moreThey think the black-hole flare may have been caused by the close passage of either a star called S0-2 last year or a dusty object called G2 in 2014.The scientists hope more observations of Sgr A* will help them sort out what the massive black hole is doing. Those observations include measurements made overnight on Aug. 13 and 14 after a hiatus due to protests at Mauna Kea.Related: The Strangest Black Holes in the UniverseOther instruments, including the Spitzer and Chandra space telescopes and ground-based instruments, have pointed to Sgr A* on and off throughout the past few months, although those data have yet to be analyzed. ART-XC, a new Russian space telescope that launched about a month ago, also has turned its eye on the black hole despite still being in its calibration period.The black hole is also the target of the globe-spanning Event Horizon Telescope, a collaboration that published the first image of a black hole in April. The historic image was of the black hole at the heart of a galaxy called M87, but the scientists are also working on processing data about Sgr A*.The original observations are described in a paper posted to the preprint server arXiv.org on Aug. 5 that was recently accepted for publication in The Astrophysical Journal Letters.The Future of Black Hole Photography: Whats Next for the Event Horizon TelescopeNo Escape: Dive Into a Black Hole (Infographic)Why Are Black Holes So Weird?Email Meghan Bartels at mbartels@space.com or follow her @meghanbartels. Follow us on Twitter @Spacedotcom and on Facebook.





Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more! And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com.



Meghan BartelsSocial Links NavigationSenior WriterMeghan is a senior writer at Space.com and has more than five years experience as a science journalist based in New York City. She joined Space.com in July 2018, with previous writing published in outlets including Newsweek and Audubon. Meghan earned an MA in science journalism from New York University and a BA in classics from Georgetown University, and in her free time she enjoys reading and visiting museums. Follow her on Twitter at @meghanbartels.





















































MORE FROM SPACE...1Japans new H3 rocket aborts 1st-ever launch attempt2Virgin Galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202133 mystery objects shot down by US likely werent spy craft, Biden says4Black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy5Pictures from space! Our image of the day





















Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site 
.





About Us 


Terms and conditions 


Privacy policy 


Cookies policy 


Accessibility Statement 


Topics 


Advertise with us 


Web notifications 


Careers 






©

Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,

New York,

NY 10036. 





 























 







 

