











Slumbering Supermassive Black Hole Hides In New Hubble Image, Video | Space

































































































































































































































Skip to main content













Open menu

Close menu













Space



































Space 









Search



 





Search Space







 







Subscribe







RSS









  




  




  




  




  












All About Space Magazine 
 
Why subscribe?Your monthly guide to stargazing & space scienceSubscribe today and save an extra 5% with code LOVE5Issues delivered straight to your door or deviceFrom$3.99 
View 


























News









Astronomy









Spaceflight









The Moon









Our Solar System









Skywatching









More









Videos





Search for LIfe





Technology





Entertainment





Reference





SpaceX





Expert Voices





Forums





All Topics





Subscribe to All About Space Magazine!





Space.com Store





About Us





Web Notifications











 











TrendingRare green Comet C/2022 E3 (ZFT)!Best TelescopesBest Star ProjectorsNext Full MoonSpace CalendarBest BinocularsLego Star Wars dealsArtemis 1 updatesBest DronesSolar System PlanetsNight Sky TonightRussia-Ukraine war space impacts



When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.













Home





News





Science & Astronomy







Slumbering Supermassive Black Hole Hides In New Hubble Image, Video





By Elizabeth Howell published 15 March 2016 













  








  








 









 








  








  
















































A Hubble Space Telescope image of elliptical galaxy NGC 4889, in front of hundreds of background galaxies. NGC 4889 hosts a hidden supermassive black hole.

(Image credit: NASA & ESA)









An ordinary galaxy hosts an enormous, hidden black hole in a new Hubble view.The newfound supermassive black hole embedded in the elliptical galaxy NGC 4889, as shown in a new video, is one of the biggest ever discovered at 21 billion times the mass of the sun. Its strong, inescapable gravitational pull has an event horizon 15 times the diameter of Neptunes orbit —an incredible 81 billion miles (130 billion kilometers) in diameter.Against these numbers, the supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way is a pipsqueak. Its gravitational influence extends only about as far as one-fifth of Mercurys equivalent orbit. Also, the Milky Ways black hole mass is just 4 million times that of the sun. It cannot match this new black holes mighty gulps. [No Escape: Dive into a Black Hole (Infographic)]But the time when NGC 4889s black hole was swallowing stars and devouring dust is past, the Hubble European Space Agency Information Centre said in a statement.Astronomers believe that the gigantic black hole has stopped feeding, and is currently resting after feasting on NGC 4889’s cosmic cuisine, they added. The environment within the galaxy is now so peaceful that stars are forming from its remaining gas and orbiting undisturbed around the black hole.The black hole used to be fueled by galactic material such as gas and dust, which fell inward and created a spinning disk of material known as an accretion disc. The black holes strong gravity accelerated the material and heated it to millions of degrees, with the material sending out huge jets.These jets and energy would have made the galaxy system a quasar, one of the brightest celestial objects in the universe. At that time, it would have sent out energy up to 1,000 times stronger than what we see from the Milky Way. Although the material is now gone, NGC 4889 still is a useful object for astronomers to better understand the evolution of quasars.The huge mass of the black hole was determined using instruments on two ground-based telescopes: the Keck II Observatory and the Gemini North Telescope. Astronomers measured how fast stars move around NGC 4889. Since their velocity depends on the mass of the object they orbit, this revealed the mass of supermassive black hole.Editors Note: This article was updated to reflect the total mass of the newly-discovered black hole.Follow Elizabeth Howell @howellspace, or Space.com @Spacedotcom. Were also on Facebook and Google+. Original article on Space.com.





Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more! And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com.



Elizabeth HowellSocial Links NavigationStaff Writer, SpaceflightElizabeth Howell (she/her), Ph.D., is a staff writer in the spaceflight channel since 2022 covering diversity, education and gaming as well. She was contributing writer for Space.com 
 for 10 years before joining full-time, freelancing since 2012. Elizabeths reporting includes an exclusive with Office of the Vice-President of the United States, speaking several times with the International Space Station, witnessing five human spaceflight launches on two continents, working inside a spacesuit, and participating in a simulated Mars mission. Her latest book, Why Am I Taller?, is co-written with astronaut Dave Williams. Elizabeth holds a Ph.D. and M.Sc. in Space Studies from the University of North Dakota, a Bachelor of Journalism from Canadas Carleton University and (soon) a Bachelor of History from Athabasca University. Elizabeth is also a post-secondary instructor in communications and science since 2015. Elizabeth first got interested in space after watching the movie Apollo 13 in 1996, and still wants to be an astronaut someday. Mastodon: https://qoto.org/@howellspace





















































MORE FROM SPACE...1Virgin Orbit traces failed UK rocket launch to dislodged fuel filter2Star Trek Annual 2023 is a holodeck trip through Trek history3Big asteroid to zoom by Earth on Wednesday4Starspots could improve our understanding of habitable zones5South Koreas Danuri probe captures phases of Earth from lunar orbit (photo)





















Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site 
.





About Us 


Terms and conditions 


Privacy policy 


Cookies policy 


Accessibility Statement 


Topics 


Advertise with us 


Web notifications 


Careers 






©

Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,

New York,

NY 10036. 





 























 







 

