









Will our black hole eat the Milky Way?













































































































Topics











Weeks top





Latest news





Unread news





Subscribe





















































Science X Account

























































Remember me









Sign In







                           Click here to sign in with

                               





                                   or

                                











Forget Password?





Not a member?

                           Sign up







Learn more























































Nanotechnology





Physics





Earth





Astronomy & Space





Chemistry





Biology





Other Sciences







 Medicine

                                







 Technology

                                 

































































share this!













Share















Twit















Share















Email

























Home









Astronomy & Space









Astronomy























































































                                                August 16, 2016

                                                

                                            





Will our black hole eat the Milky Way?



 by Fraser Cain,   Universe Today 













                Sagittarius A*. Credit: Chandra

             





Want to hear something cool? Theres a black hole at the center of the Milky Way. And not just any black hole, its a supermassive black hole with more than 4.1 million times the mass of the Sun.



  

        













Its right over there, in the direction of the Sagittarius constellation. Located just 26,000 light-years away. And as we speak, its in the process of tearing apart entire stars and star systems, occasionally consuming them, adding to its mass like a voracious shark.

Wait, that doesnt sound cool, that sort of sounds a little scary. Right?

Dont worry, you have absolutely nothing to worry about, unless you plan to live for quadrillions of years, which I do, thanks to my future robot body. Im ready for my singularity, Dr. Kurzweil.

Is the supermassive black hole going to consume the Milky Way? If not, why not? If so, why so?

The discovery of a supermassive black hole at the heart of the Milky Way, and really almost all galaxies, is one of my favorite discoveries in the field of astronomy. Its one of those insights that simultaneously answered some questions, and opened up even more.

Back in the 1970s, the astronomers Bruce Balick and Robert Brown realized that there was an intense source of radio emissions coming from the very center of the Milky Way, in the constellation Sagittarius.





















Credit: Universe Today



They designated it Sgr A*. The asterisk stands for exciting. You think Im joking, but Im not. For once, Im not joking.

In 2002, astronomers observed that there were stars zipping past this object, like comets on elliptical paths going around the Sun. Imagine the mass of our Sun, and the tremendous power it would take to wrench a star like that around.

The only objects with that much density and gravity are black holes, but in this case, a black hole with millions of times the mass of our own Sun: a supermassive black hole.

With the discovery of the Milky Ways supermassive black hole, astronomers found evidence that there are black holes at the heart of every galaxy.

At the same time, the discovery of supermassive black holes helped answer one of the big questions in astronomy: what are quasars? We did a whole article on them, but theyre intensely bright objects, generating enough light they can be seen billions of light-years away. Giving off more energy than the rest of their own galaxy combined.





      











It turns out that quasars and supermassive black holes are the same thing. Quasars are just black holes in the process of actively feeding; gobbling up so much material it piles up in an accretion disk around it. Once again, these do sound terrifying. But are we in any danger?

In the short term, no. The black hole at the center of the Milky Way is 26,000 light-years away. Even if it turned into a quasar and started eating stars, you wouldnt even be able to notice it from this distance.











                An illustration of Saggitarius A*. Credit: NASA/CXC/M.Weiss

             





A black hole is just a concentration of mass in a very small region, which things orbit around. To give you an example, you could replace the Sun with a black hole with the exact same mass, and nothing would change. I mean, wed all freeze because there wasnt a Sun in the sky anymore, but the Earth would continue to orbit this black hole in exactly the same orbit, for billions of years.

Same goes with the black hole at the center of the Milky Way. Its not pulling material in like a vacuum cleaner, it serves as a gravitational anchor for a group of stars to orbit around, for billions of years.

In order for a black hole to actually consume a star, it needs to make a direct hit. To get within the event horizon, which is only about 17 times bigger than the Sun. If a star gets close, without hitting, itll get torn apart, but still, it doesnt happen very often.

The problem happens when these stars interact with one another through their own gravity, and mess with each others orbits. A star that would have been orbiting happily for billions of years might get deflected into a collision course with the black hole. But this happens very rarely.

Over the short term, that supermassive black hole is totally harmless. Especially from out here in the galactic suburbs.

But there are a few situations that might cause some problems over vast periods of time.

The first panic will happen when the Milky Way collides with Andromeda in about 4 billion years – lets call this mess Milkdromeda. Suddenly, youll have two whole clouds of stars interacting in all kinds of ways, like an unstable blended family. Stars that would have been safe will careen past other stars and be deflected down into the maw of either of the two supermassive black holes on hand. Andromedas black hole could be 100 million times the mass of the Sun, so its a bigger target for stars with a death wish.











                The quasar SDSS J1106+1939 has the most energetic outflows ever seen, at least five times more powerful than any that have been observed to date. Credit: ESO/L. Calçada

             





Over the coming billions, trillions and quadrillions of years, more and more galaxies will collide with Milkdromeda, bringing new supermassive black holes and more stars to the chaos.

So many opportunities for mayhem.

Of course, the Sun will die in about 5 billion years, so this future wont be our problem. Well, fine, with my eternal robot body, it might still be my problem.

After our neighborhood is completely out of galaxies to consume, then there will just be countless eons of time for stars to interact for orbit after orbit. Some will get flung out of Milkdromeda, some will be hurled down into the black hole.

And others will be safe, assuming they can avoid this fate over the Googol years itll take for the supermassive black hole to finally evaporate. Thats a 1 followed by 100 zeroes years. Thats a really really long time, so now I dont like those odds.

For our purposes, the black hole at the heart of the Milky Way is completely and totally safe. In the lifetime of the Sun, it wont interact with us in any way, or consume more than a handful of stars.

But over the vast eons, it could be a different story. I hope we can be around to find out the answer.

 







Source:

Universe Today











Citation:

Will our black hole eat the Milky Way? (2016, August 16)

retrieved 17 February 2023

from https://phys.org/news/2016-08-black-hole-milky.html

 



 This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private study or research, no

 part may be reproduced without the written permission. The content is provided for information purposes only.

 



















Explore further



Image: Computer simulation of a supermassive black hole









45 shares















Facebook















Twitter















Email















 Feedback to editors





































Featured





Last Comments





Popular











Grooming handclasp in chimpanzees found to be culturally transmitted











14 hours ago











1









Conducting supercooled droplet experiments to design and engineer superhydrophobic ice-repellent surfaces











14 hours ago











0









Neanderthal genes may have helped early humans adapt to differences in Eurasian daylight hours











14 hours ago











0









Indian astronomers inspect open cluster Teutsch 76 in detail











17 hours ago











0









Researchers observe a bubble phase of composite fermions











19 hours ago











0



































 

Study demonstrates energy-efficient conversion of nitrate pollutants into ammonia











10 hours ago



















 

Study quantifies global impact of electricity in dust storms on Mars











10 hours ago



















 

Researchers develop light-controlled drugs for future precision therapies against diseases such as cancer











11 hours ago



















 

Smooth sailing for electrons in graphene: Measuring fluid-like flow at nanometer resolution











11 hours ago



















 

Perovskites, a dirt cheap alternative to silicon, just got a lot more efficient











11 hours ago



















 

Newly identified tsetse fly pheromone may help in curbing disease spread











12 hours ago



















 

Flash Joule technique efficiently turns would-be pollution into valuable nanomaterials











12 hours ago



















 

Slow motion: Scientists investigate tectonic plate boundary earthquake behavior











13 hours ago



















 

Antarctica sea ice melts to a record low











14 hours ago



















 

Grooming handclasp in chimpanzees found to be culturally transmitted











14 hours ago



































































Related Stories











 

Image: Computer simulation of a supermassive black hole











Apr 7, 2016



















 

Where is the closest black hole?











Mar 21, 2016



















 

Could the Milky Way become a quasar?











Feb 27, 2015























 

How massive can black holes get?











Aug 11, 2015



















 

Hubble image: The sleeping giant











Feb 11, 2016



















 

Rare galaxy with 2 black holes has 1 starved of stars











Jan 5, 2016





















Recommended for you











 

Indian astronomers inspect open cluster Teutsch 76 in detail











17 hours ago



















 

Polarized shockwaves shake the universes cosmic web











17 hours ago



















 

New aurorae detected on Jupiters four largest moons











14 hours ago























 

A star is born: Images of nearby galaxies provide clues about star formation











14 hours ago



















 

Tadpole molecular cloud appears to be playing around black hole











16 hours ago



















 

Scientists find first evidence that black holes are the source of dark energy











Feb 15, 2023





















































Load comments (1)

 





























Let us know if there is a problem with our content





















Use this form if you have come across a typo, inaccuracy or would like to send an edit request for the content on this page.

For general inquiries, please use our  contact form.

For general feedback, use the public comments section below (please adhere to guidelines).



Please select the most appropriate category to facilitate processing of your request





 -- please select one -- 

Compliments / Critique

Typos / Errors / Inaccuracies

Edit / Removal request









Your message to the editors











Your  email  (only if you want to be contacted back)









Send Feedback









Thank you for taking time to provide your feedback to the editors.

Your feedback is important to us. However, we do not guarantee individual replies due to the high volume of messages. 



















E-mail the story

Will our black hole eat the Milky Way?























Your friends email











Your email



















                                            I would like to subscribe to Science X Newsletter. Learn more















Your name







Note



                                            Your email address is used only to let the recipient know who sent the email. Neither your address nor the recipients address will be used for any other purpose.

The information you enter will appear in your e-mail message and is not retained by Phys.org in any form. 

                                        









Your message



















Send















































































Newsletter sign up



Get weekly and/or daily updates delivered to your inbox.

You can unsubscribe at any time and well never share your details to third parties.















Subscribe







More information

Privacy policy



























Medical Xpress

Medical research advances and health news



















Tech Xplore

The latest engineering, electronics and technology advances



















Science X

The most comprehensive sci-tech news coverage on the web





















Newsletters















Subscribe













                                                Science X Daily and the Weekly Email Newsletter are free features that allow you to receive your favorite sci-tech news updates in your email inbox

                                            













Follow us































































Top





Home





Search





Mobile version









Help





FAQ





About





Contact









Science X Account





Sponsored Account





Archive





News wire









Android app





iOS app





RSS feeds





Push notification















© Phys.org 2003 - 2023 powered by Science X Network





Privacy policy

Terms of use











Your Privacy



                    This site uses cookies to assist with navigation, analyse your use of our services, collect data for ads personalisation and provide content from third parties.

                    By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understand our Privacy Policy

                    and Terms of Use.

                



Ok

Cookie options



























E-mail newsletter

















Subscribe





Follow us





















































































