





Massive Black Hole Bends Light to Magnify Distant Galaxy | Space
















































































































Skip to main content






Open menu
Close menu






Space

















Space 




Search

 


Search Space



 



Subscribe



RSS




  (opens in new tab)

  (opens in new tab)

  (opens in new tab)

  (opens in new tab)

  (opens in new tab)





All About Space Magazine (opens in new tab) (opens in new tab)Why subscribe?Your monthly guide to stargazing & space scienceSubscribe today and save an extra 5% with code 'LOVE5'Issues delivered straight to your door or deviceFrom$3.99 (opens in new tab)View (opens in new tab)












News




Astronomy




Spaceflight




The Moon




Our Solar System




Skywatching




More




Videos


Search for LIfe


Technology


Entertainment


Reference


SpaceX


Expert Voices


Forums


All Topics


Subscribe to "All About Space" Magazine!


Space.com Store


About Us


Web Notifications





 





TrendingMeteorite from European fireball!Best TelescopesBest Star ProjectorsNext Full MoonSpace CalendarBest BinocularsLego Star Wars dealsArtemis 1 updatesBest DronesSolar System PlanetsNight Sky TonightRussia-Ukraine war space impacts

When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.






Home


News


Science & Astronomy



Massive Black Hole Bends Light to Magnify Distant Galaxy


By Clara Moskowitz published 27 July 2010 






  (opens in new tab)



  (opens in new tab)



 




 (opens in new tab)



  (opens in new tab)



  (opens in new tab)























This labeled image of the first-ever foreground quasar (blue) lensing a background galaxy (red) was taken with the Keck II telescope and its NIRC-2 instrument using laser guide star adaptive optics. Discovering more of these lenses will allow astronomers to determine the masses of quasars’ host galaxies.
(Image credit: F. Courbin/S. G. Djorgovski/G. Meylan/Caltech/EPFL/WMKO)




A giant black hole spouting energy from inside a galaxy isacting like a cosmic magnifying glass, giving astronomers a clear view of an evenmore distant galaxy behind it.It is the first time a quasar ? the central region of agalaxy dominated by an energy-spewingblack hole ? has been discovered acting as a gravitationallens. The cosmic lens phenomenon was first predicted by Albert Einstein's theoryof general relativity.The discovery gives astronomers a glimpse at two galaxies atonce, allowing researchers to photograph the distant object while weighing andmeasuring the intervening galaxy and the bright powerhouse at its core.The quasar is known as SDSS J0013+1523 and located about 1.6billion light-years from Earth.Warped space-timeAccording to the theory, very large masses warp thespace-time around them, even causing light to bend as it travels through theregion. Thus, light from farawayobjects sometimes can be magnified by the bent space-time to provide alarger and brighter ? though also distorted and curved ? view.In this case, scientists are more interested in studying thelens itself than the magnified image.Galaxies that host quasars are hard to study because theirlight is often overpowered by the blaring radiation from material falling ontothe supermassiveblack holes in their centers. A single quasar can be 1,000 times brighterthan an entire galaxy of 100 billion stars."It is a bit like staring into bright car headlightsand trying to discern the color of their rims," lead researcher Fr?d?ricCourbin of the Ecole Polytechnique F?d?rale de Lausanne in Switzerland said ina statement. By studying the way a quasar magnifies light as a gravitationallens, he said, "we now can measure the masses of these quasar hostgalaxies and overcome this difficulty."Weighing quasarsThe newfound lens, and similar ones being sought by researchers,could provide an opportunity to learn about the galaxies that shelter quasarsin their centers.By studying the way the quasar magnifies the distant light ?including the shape of its distortion and the number of magnified images thelens produces ? scientists can measure how matter is distributed in the lensgalaxy. They can even calculate the total matter of the quasar and its hostgalaxy.Often quasarsare discovered when their light is being magnified by an intervening galaxyacting as a gravitational lens. Scientists set out to look for a case of thisreverse lensing of a galaxy's light by a quasar by looking through the dataobtained by the Sloan Digital Sky Survey ? a detailed map of a quarter of thesky.It was through that study that researchers found the quasar SDSSJ0013+1523 acting as a cosmic lens."We were delighted to see that this idea actuallyworks," said Georges Meylan, a professor of physics at Ecole PolytechniqueF?d?rale de Lausanne."This discovery demonstrates the continued utility ofgravitational lensing as an astrophysical tool."The researchers published their findings July 20 in thejournal Astronomy & Astrophysics.How Black Holes Gobble Dark MatterTop 10 Strangest Things in SpaceVideo: Black Holes: Warping Time & Space


Join our Space Forums to keep talking space on the latest missions, night sky and more! And if you have a news tip, correction or comment, let us know at: community@space.com.

Clara MoskowitzSocial Links NavigationAssistant Managing EditorClara Moskowitz is a science and space writer who joined the Space.com team in 2008 and served as Assistant Managing Editor from 2011 to 2013. Clara has a bachelor's degree in astronomy and physics from Wesleyan University, and a graduate certificate in science writing from the University of California, Santa Cruz. She covers everything from astronomy to human spaceflight and once aced a NASTAR suborbital spaceflight training program for space missions. Clara is currently Associate Editor of Scientific American. To see her latest project is, follow Clara on Twitter.


























MORE FROM SPACE...1Japan's new H3 rocket aborts 1st-ever launch attempt2Virgin Galactic carrier plane flies for 1st time since 202133 mystery objects shot down by US likely weren't spy craft, Biden says4Black holes may be the source of mysterious dark energy5Pictures from space! Our image of the day










Space is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site (opens in new tab).


About Us (opens in new tab)
Terms and conditions (opens in new tab)
Privacy policy (opens in new tab)
Cookies policy (opens in new tab)
Accessibility Statement (opens in new tab)
Topics (opens in new tab)
Advertise with us (opens in new tab)
Web notifications (opens in new tab)
Careers (opens in new tab)


©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. 


 











 



 
