.Exploring Black Holes | NSF - National Science Foundation.
Skip to main content.
.An official website of the United States government.Here’s how you know.Here's how you know.Official websites use .gov.
A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
.Secure .gov websites use HTTPS.
A lock.
(LockLocked padlock).
or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website.
Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
.
Search.
.Menu.Search.search.Funding & Awards.Fund Your Research.Overview.Search for Funding.Cross-Cutting Initiatives.Learn About Funding.Policies and Procedures.Proposal and Award Policies and Procedures Guide (PAPPG).Programs for Small Businesses.NSF-Funded Projects.Search for Awards.Learn About Awards.Public Access Initiative.Academic Technology Transfer and Commercialization of University Research.Research Directorates & Offices.Biological Sciences.Computer and Information Science and Engineering.Engineering.Geosciences.Integrative Activities.International Science and Engineering.Mathematical and Physical Sciences.Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences.STEM Education.Technology, Innovation and Partnerships.News & Events.In the News.News.Multimedia Gallery.Special Reports.What's Happening.Events.Science Matters Blog.For the press.Press Releases.Media Contacts.Fact Sheets.Science Topics.Explore NSF Discoveries.Arctic & Antarctic.Astronomy & Space.Biology.Chemistry & Materials.Computing.Earth & Environment.Education.Engineering.Mathematics.Nanoscience.People & Society.Physics.About NSF.Working with NSF.Career Opportunities.Contracting With NSF.Diversity Policy.About.About NSF.NSF History.Strategic Partners.NSF Policies.Budget, Performance and Financial Reporting.Contact Us.NSF Toolkit.Remote Participant Support.National Science Board.Visit NSF.NSF Organization.Organization List.Senior Management.Staff Directory.For Congress.Congressional Portal.
Exploring Black Holes.
.Exploring Black Holes.
What is a black hole?.
How are black holes studied?.
.
Learn how.
Event Horizon Telescope.
LIGO.
Andrea Ghez and the UCLA Galactic Center Group.
NRAO.
NOIRLab.
Green Bank Observatory.
South Pole Telescope.
Images, video, and educational resources.
Share.
.FacebookTwitterLinkedInEmail.Credit: NRAO/AUI/National Science Foundation; S. Dagnello.Black holes have long captured the imagination, from groundbreaking ideas in Albert Einstein’s theory of general relativity to the first image of a black hole, revealed a century later by the global Event Horizon Telescope.
On this site, explore the nature of black holes, read the latest news about black hole research, and download a wide range of educational materials, images and videos of the universe’s most extreme objects.All Sag A* multimedia — including new images, video content and a b-roll package is available for download on the EHT page.Credit: NRAO/AUI/NSF; D. Berry/Skyworks.What is a black hole?.Black holes are extremely dense pockets of matter, objects of such incredible mass and miniscule volume that they drastically warp the fabric of space-time.
Anything that passes too close, from a wandering star to a photon of light, gets captured.
Most black holes are the condensed remnants of a massive star, the collapsed core that remains following an explosive supernova.
However, the black hole family tree has several branches, from tiny structures on par with a human cell to enormous giants billions of times more massive than our sun.
Learn more about black holes.Return to top.Welcome to the new NSF website.
We're completely revamping our site and we’re doing it in the open so you can check on our progress.
Learn more about the project.
(703) 292-5111.2415 Eisenhower Avenue, Alexandria, Virginia 22314.Required Policy Links.Contact us.Website policies.Budget, Performance and Financial Reporting.Inspector General.Privacy.FOIA.No FEAR Act.USA.gov.Accessibility.Plain language.Research.gov.
